=== PAGE 161 ===
 
161 
 
CHAPTER 5: MUTUAL FUNDS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1  Meaning and Description of a Mutual Fund 
Investors buy equity shares, debentures, jewel lery and gold coins, residential and commercial 
property with their savings. This is the direct way of investing where assets bought are held directly 
in their names. 
Direct investments impose on the investors, the following responsibilities of selecting and 
managing the investments: 
 Selection: Is it the right stock or bond or property to buy? 
 Price: Is it the correct price given for the underlying stock/ asset? 
 Timing: Is the time right to buy the investment? 
 Weighting: How much of each type to buy? How should a portfolio be created? 
 Evaluation: Is there a reason to think that the value of the asset will increase or decrease? 
 Exit: Is it the right time to sell the investment? Will it be possible to sell it easily? 
 Operations: Are the operational requirements, s uch as trading and depository accounts, 
safe deposit facilities, legal and regulatory compliances in place? 
Not all investors may have the ability to do all that is required to make direct investments. Some 
may be unwilling to take on all the activities as sociated with direct investing; some may find the 
cost and time spent on direct investing avoidable. 
Investors, who like to invest in the securities markets and other assets but like to engage someone 
else to create and manage their portfolio, choose mutual funds. Mutual funds invest and manage 
the investors’ money by selecting the investments after evaluating their prospects, price and 
performance. Mutual funds take up these tasks for a fee that the investor pays. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: 
After studying this chapter, you should know about: 
 Meaning and description of a mutual fund, terminology related to mutual fund and 
working of mutual fund  
 Mutual Fund regulations 
 Concept of systematic transaction in mutual funds 
 Reading mutual fund information 
 Benefits and Costs of Investing in Mutual Funds 

=== PAGE 162 ===
 
162 
 
5.1.1 Basic Features of a Mutual Fund 
 A mutual fund is a pool of investors’ money that is managed by specialist investment 
management firms. 
 Mutual funds offer products (also called funds, schemes, plans) to investo rs, stating 
upfront the objectives with which the pooled money will be invested. 
 Investors who invest money in a fund are allotted mutual fund units which represent their 
proportional participation in the assets of the mutual fund scheme. 
 The money that is mobilised is invested in a portfolio of securities in accordance with the 
objectives. 
 The portfolio is monitored and managed on behalf of investors by the mutual fund, without 
the investors having to directly transact in securities. 
 Details about the securities in which the fund has invested and the performance in terms 
of risk and return are periodically disclosed to the investors. 
 Investors can buy or sell mutual fund units from the fund itself or in the secondary markets 
if the schemes are listed.  
 Investors in a mutual fund are unit holders, just as investors in equity are shareholders. 
The risk of the portfolio of securities is directly borne by them, without any assurances or 
guarantees. 
 Mutual funds in India are not permitted to borrow in order to in vest in a portfolio.55 Unit 
holders are the sole owners of the assets of the mutual fund. 
 The activities of a mutual fund including collecting money from investors, creating and 
managing the portfolio are subject to SEBI regulations. 
5.1.2 Features of Mutual Fund Products 
There are several mutual fund products in the market. The following are the features that 
distinguish one mutual fund product from another: 
 Asset allocation: Proportions in which the fund will invest in securities such as equity, debt, 
gold, real estate exclusively or in a combination. 
 Investment objective:  The focus in creating and managing the portfolio – growth and 
capital appreciation, generation of regular income or a combination of both. 
 Costs and fees:  The costs to be borne by the investor on an annual basis for the 
management of the fund and charges while leaving the fund. 
                                                           
55 Note: As per SEBI regulations, a mutual fund may borrow only to meet temporary liquidity needs, such as for 
repurchase or redemption of units, or for payment of interest or dividend to unitholders. (Reference: Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulation, 1996(Amended on November 01,2025)) 
 

=== PAGE 163 ===
 
163 
 
 Operational details: The terms for subscription, redemption and ongoing transacti ons in 
the fund. 
5.2 Terms and Concepts Related to Mutual Funds 
Mutual Fund 
The term mutual fund refers to the common pool of funds contributed by investors. When  
investors invest in a mutual fund, they give their concurrence to their money being managed in 
the way that the investment management company has stated upfront. The funds and 
investments of the mutual fund are held in a trust of which the investors alone are the joint 
beneficial owners. Trustees oversee the management of the investors’ money by the investment 
manager. The term “mutual fund” is also used for the fund house that manages several funds using 
the same investment manager. 
Mutual Fund Scheme  
A mutual fund may offer multiple products, variously called schemes, plans and funds to investors. 
Different schemes launched by a Mutual Fund should ideally be distinct in terms of asset 
allocation, investment strategy and other essential aspects. This aspect helps an investor to 
evaluate the different types of investment options available in mutual funds and accordingly take 
an informed decision to invest in a mutual fund scheme.  
With this underlying objective, SEBI has broadly classified mutual funds into 5 categories: 
 Equity  
 Debt  
 Hybrid  
 Solution Oriented  
 Others 
Further, SEBI has enlisted the different categories of schemes under the above mentioned group. 
Only one scheme per category is permitted, except for: 
(a) Index Funds/ ETFs replicating/tracking different indices 
(b) Fund of Funds having different underlying schemes 
(c) Sectoral/ thematic funds investing in different sectors/ themes. 
The mutual fund houses are expected to put out explicitly the ‘type of scheme’ in their offer 
documents/ advertisements/ marketing material for their mutual fund schemes.  
 
 

=== PAGE 164 ===
 
164 
 
Pooling and Proportionate Representation 
Mutual fund pools the money contributed by investors to a scheme and invests them in a portfolio 
of securities.  The investments made by the fund belong to the investors, who will share the profits 
or losses made and the costs incurred in proportion to their investment.  
Example: 
 Three investors invest Rs. 10,000, Rs. 20,000 and Rs. 30,000 respectively in a mutual fund.  The 
pooled sum is Rs. 60,000 and their proportionate holding is in the ratio 1:2:3 
 The money is invested in equity shares. After some time, the shares in which the fund s were 
invested appreciates in value and are now worth Rs. 72,000. 
 The value of the investors’ holding in the mutual fund also goes up proportionately (in the ratio 
of 1:2:3) to Rs. 12,000, Rs. 24,000 and Rs.36,000 respectively. 
Units and Unit Capital 
An investor’s investment in a mutual fund is represented by the number of  units holding and a 
mutual fund investor is called a unit holder. Each unit has a face value, typically Rs.10. In the above 
example, if the inve stors bought the units at the face value, the number of units that will be 
allotted to them is 1 ,000 units (Rs.10,000/Rs.10), 2000 units (Rs.20,000/Rs.10) and 3000 units 
(Rs.30,000/Rs.10) respectively. 
The face value is relevant from an accounting perspective. The number of units issued by a scheme 
multiplied by its face value (Rs. 10) is the capital of the scheme i.e. its Unit Capital.  In the above 
example, the unit capital of the scheme is Rs. 60,000 [(1000+2000+3000)*Rs.10]. 
Mark to Market (MTM) 
The money contributed by investors in a  mutual fund is invested in a portfolio of securities. The 
value of these securities will fluctuate and lead to an increase or decrease in the value of the 
portfolio. A mutual fund has to calculate and declare to its inve stors the current market value of 
each unit every day by taking the current market price of the securities held in the portfolio. This 
process of valuing the securities at its current market price is called marking to market (MTM).  In 
the example above, the cost of investment was Rs.60,000 and its MTM value was Rs.72,000. 
Net Asset Value (NAV) 
The NAV is the current value of a mutual fund unit. This will depend upon the current MTM value 
of the securities held in the portfolio of the fund and any income earned such as dividend and 
interest. From this value, the costs and expenses charged for managing the fund are deducted. 
The value remaining is called the net assets of the fund. The net assets divided by the number of 
outstanding units give the Net Asset Value of the fund.  

=== PAGE 165 ===
 
165 
 
Consider the example we used earlier: 
 There were 6000 units of Rs.10 each issued.   
 The current market value of the portfolio was Rs. 72,000. 
 Assume dividend income of Rs.3000 and expenses of Rs.600.  
 The net assets are calculated by adding income earned and deducting expenses incurred from 
the current market value of the portfolio. The net asset is Rs.74, 400. 
 The number of units  issued were 6000, so the net a sset value per unit is 74,400/6000 = 
Rs.12.40 
 The NAV of the fund has moved up from Rs.10 per unit to Rs.12.40 per unit. 
The NAV of a fund is calculated every business day so that the investors know the value of their 
investments. Investors buy and sell units at a price based on NAV. 
Pricing of Transactions 
It is common for mutual funds to be “open-ended”. This means there is no fixed maturity date for 
the fund, and investors can buy (purchase) or sell (redeem) units on any business day as per their 
convenience (business day is the day on which a fund is open for transactions, and typically 
excludes holidays). Investor’s transactions are done at a price linked to the NAV (NAV adjusted for 
any charges associated with buying or selling). Transactions are pri ced using the NAV to ensure 
parity among investors that buy new units, investors that stay in the fund, and investors that move 
out of a fund.  
Example: 
The fund in our earlier example had 6000 units, whose current market value is Rs.74,400.  The face 
value per unit is Rs.10; the NAV per unit is Rs.12.40.  
A. New investor buys 1000 units and pays the face value of Rs.10 per unit. 
 Assets of the fund are now 74400+10000 = 84400. 
 The NAV will be = 84400/7000 = Rs.12.05. 
The NAV has dropped from 12.40 to 12.05, not because the portfolio lost in market value, but 
because a new investor came in. Existing unit holders face a loss in NAV due to the entry of the 
new investor at face value.  
B. New investor buys 1000 units and pays the NAV of Rs.12.40 per unit. 
 Assets of the fund are now 74400+12400 = 86800. 
 The NAV will be = 86800/7000 = Rs.12.40. 

=== PAGE 166 ===
 
166 
 
The NAV has remained unchanged since the incoming investor paid the NAV, not the face value. 
C. Existing investor sells 1000 units and receives the face value of Rs.10 per unit. 
 Assets of the fund are now 74400 - 10000 = 64400. 
 The NAV will be = 64400/5000 = Rs.12.88. 
The NAV has increased from 12.40 to 12.88, not because the portfolio gained in market value, but 
because an existing investor left. Existing unit holders face a gain in NAV due to the exit of investors 
at face value.  
D. Existing investor sells 1000 units and receives the NAV of Rs.12.40 per unit. 
 Assets of the fund are now 74400 - 12400 = 62000. 
 The NAV will be = 62000/5000 = Rs.12.40 
The NAV has remained unchanged since the outgoing investor received the NAV, not face value. 
The NAV remains the same after the fresh purchase of units or redemption of existing units, if the 
units are priced at the current NAV.  
Fund Running Expenses 
Apart from the fees payable to the asset management company, direct expenses incurred in 
managing the investment portfolio are charged to investors. The specific types of expenses that 
can be charged to the investors and the limits to these expenses are stipulated by regulation.  
Expenses are calculated as a percentage of the daily average net assets managed by the fund. After 
marking the assets to market for purposes of computing NAV, funds deduct the expense for each 
day from the value of the investments. The NAV is lower to the extent of the expenses. Investors 
do not pay the expenses separately ; it is already reflected in the NAV. It is common to refer to 
expenses in terms of the total expense ratio (TER) as a percentage of assets  under management 
(AUM). The rates of TER differ with the type of mutual funds (i.e. equity or debt or index funds 
etc.). 
Loads 
Mutual funds may impose a charge on the investors at the time of exiting from a fund called the 
exit load. Mutual funds charge an exit load linked to the period of holding of the investor. It is 
calculated as a percentage of the NAV and reduced from  the NAV to arrive at the price that the 
investor will get on exiting from the investment.  
Example: A mutual fund charges an exit load of 1  percent of the NAV if the funds are redeemed 
by the investor within 1 year from the date of purchase. Redemption of units post 1 year from the 
date of purchase will not levy any exit load. 

=== PAGE 167 ===
 
167 
 
If the NAV is Rs. 12, then the exit load will be 1 percent of Rs. 12 which is 0.12 (if redeems within 
1 year of purchase). The price that the investor will get when he redeems his units (within 1 year 
of purchase) is Rs. 11.88 (Rs.12-0.12). Currently, entry loads are prohibited by SEBI.Relative 
Performance 
A mutual fund invests in a portfolio of securities, whose value changes depending on the changes 
in the market. A mutual fund therefore cannot assure or guarantee a rate of return. The return a 
fund generates will reflect the return generated by that asset class. For example, equity funds will 
generate returns in line with equity markets and with the volatility that equity investments have. 
When equity market rise, the equity funds’ performance will also be good and it will decline when 
equity markets fall.  A fund tries to replicate or better the return of an asset class (usually 
represented by a market index).  
Diversification 
The value of a portfolio depends upon the price of the securities held in it, which can be volatile 
and move up and down over time. However, not all such prices will rise and fall together or in 
equal value at any point in time. If prices of banking stocks are moving up, the prices of technology 
stocks may be moving down, since these sectors are influenced by different factors. Even if  the 
banking sector stocks are moving up, every banking stock may not appreciate to the same extent. 
Diversification means creating a portfolio of securities such that the overall portfolio is well 
balanced across multiple sectors and securities, so that the rise or fall in prices of the components 
is smoothened out.  Most mutual fund portfolios are well diversified, unless they are specifically 
designed to focus on a single sector. A portion of a well -diversified portfolio can be bought while 
investing in a mutual fund even with a small investment of say, Rs.5000.  It may otherwise not be 
feasible to replicate a diversified portfolio with such a small amount. 
Pass through Entity 
A mutual fund’s portfolio earns taxable income and capital gains on the investments held in normal 
course. The fund may distribute the realised gains and income as dividend (recall that 
contributions to unit capital are  not a loan, but capital). Investors may also earn the unrealised 
capital gain included in the NAV, when they redeem  or sell their units.  The underlying income is 
the same, but it is accrued once in the books of the mutual fund, and again in the books of the 
investor.  In order to prevent the same income from being taxed twice, mutual funds are classified 
as “pass-through” entities under the income tax laws. The income of a mutual fund registered with 
SEBI, is completely exempt from tax. The income is earned on behalf of the investors and passed 
through to them, and is therefore taxed only in the hands of the investors.  
Open-ended, Closed End and Interval Funds 

=== PAGE 168 ===
 
168 
 
Units of mutual funds are first issued to investors when the scheme is launched. Subsequently, the 
investors’ purchase and sale transactions with the fund depend upon the structure of the mutual 
fund. 
I. Open-Ended Funds 
 An open-ended mutual fund does not have a fixed maturity date. 
 Investors can buy additional units from the fund at any time at the current NAV-linked 
price. 
 Existing investors can sell their units back to the fund at current NAV-linked prices. 
 An open-ended fund may also be listed on the stock exchanges for trading. 
II. Closed-End Funds 
 A closed -end mutual fund issues units to the investors only when the scheme is 
launched i.e. during its new fund offer (NFO) period.  
 The fund is closed for subscription a nd additional units are not issued after the NFO 
period by the fund.  
 These funds have a fixed maturity date when the fund buys back the units from the 
investors at the prevailing NAV-linked price and the fund is wound-up.  
 The units of closed -end schemes are mandatorily listed on stock exchanges where 
investors can buy and sell among themselves. The mutual fund is not involved in these 
transactions. 
III. Interval Funds 
 These funds have features of both open-ended and closed-ended fund. 
 Units are allotted to investors when the scheme is launched.  
 The fund specifies  transaction periods, such as three days every quarter, when 
investors can buy units and sell units directly with the fund. 
 The funds are listed on the stock exchange s where the investors can buy and sell the 
units among themselves. 
Dividend and Growth Options 
Investors are offered two options to receive the returns that the fund has generated- growth and 
dividend. Dividend plans may offer a further choice of pay-out or re-investment.  

=== PAGE 169 ===
 
169 
 
 In the growth option, the gains made in the portfolio are not distributed but retained in 
the fund. The gains are reflected in the rising NAV. Investors can realise the gains by selling 
the units.  
 In the pay -out of Income Distribution cum Capital Withdrawal (IDCW) option, the fund 
declares dividends from the realised profits in the mutual fund portfolio  and distributes 
the same to the unitholders. This option is renamed as pay-out of income distribution cum 
capital withdrawal option.  
 In the re -investment of Income Distribution cum Capital Withdrawal (IDCW)  option, the 
dividend declared by the fund is not paid out, but is re -invested in the same scheme by 
buying additional units for the investor. This option is renamed as re-investment of income 
distribution cum capital withdrawal option.56 
Working of a Mutual Fund 
The Asset Management Company (AMC) is the specialist investment manager that manages the 
mutual fund. The fund manager and other persons who conduct the day-to-day operations of the 
mutual fund are all employees of the AMC. The AMC launches mutual fund schemes, collects 
money from investors and manages it. For this the AMC charges a fee from the investors who 
invest in the fund. The AMC is the entity with whom the investors of a mutual fund deal with for 
all their requirements. The activities of the AMC are supervised by its own board of directors and 
by the board of trustees of the mutual fund who act in the interest of investors. All major decisions 
taken by the AMC are subject to trustee approval. Trustees meet at least 6 times a year to monitor 
and review the activities of the fund. 
A mutual fund scheme is first offered to investors in a new fund offer (NFO). This is the primary 
market issue for a fund p roduct. The details of the scheme are provided in the scheme related 
document (i.e. Scheme Information Document, Statement of Additional Information and Key 
Information Memorandum) to enable investors to assess the scheme before buying the units. 
Mutual fund schemes are distributed through a large network of institutional distributors such as 
banks and brokers, as well as individual distributors. These distributors are empanelled by mutual 
funds to sell their schemes. They receive a commission from the fu nd called ‘trail’ commission, 
which is paid periodically as a percentage of net assets brought in by the distributor for as long as 
the investor’s money is held in the fund.  Investors can also choose to invest directly in a fund 
without involving a distributor. 
                                                           
56 In order to clearly communicate the investors that, under dividend option of a Mutual Fund Scheme, certain portion 
of his capital can be distributed as dividend, SEBI vide Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DF3/CIR/P/2020/194 dated October 
5, 2020, has renamed the dividend options of all the existing and proposed mutual fund schemes.  

=== PAGE 170 ===
 
170 
 
Investors apply for mutual fund units using the prescribed application form and paying for the 
units purchased through banking channels. The NFO price is usually the face value, typically Rs.10 
per unit. Ongoing purchases in open -ended schemes are at  NAV-linked prices. Mutual funds will 
define the minimum investment amount for a scheme, which can vary from Rs.500 for a few 
schemes, Rs. 5,000 for most schemes, and Rs.10,000 for a few others. Investors are allotted units 
at the price applicable on the d ate of transaction.  The details of the investor’s holding and 
transactions are maintained under unique folio numbers created for each investor.  Registrar and 
transfer agents (R&T agents) facilitate investor services for most funds. 
The money mobilised from investors is not held by the AMC in its bank account, but by a 
specifically appointed custodian.  The custodian bank holds the funds as well as securities on 
behalf of the investors. The sales teams of the AMC mobilise money throug h the distribution 
channels. The treasury and operations teams work with R&T agents and custodians to invest and 
maintain the funds and investor records.  
The investment management team (also called fund managers, who are employees of the AMC) 
are the specialists who create and manage the portfolio. They are responsible for the returns and 
performance of the scheme.  They work with brokers, research teams, and issuers to identify the 
securities to invest in. The brokers execute the trades resulting from the  investment decisions 
taken by the fund managers. The custodian bank settles these transactions by making and 
receiving delivery of funds and securities.  
The valuation of the investment portfolio of a fund is done every business day. Incomes and 
expenses are accrued, and the portfolio is marked to market. The NAV is declared by the end of 
the day and published on the website and in the media. These activities may be done by the 
valuation team in-house or by the custodian if the fund chooses to out -source the work. Mutual 
funds are required to disclose the complete investment portfolio and accounts (balance sheet and 
profit and loss accounts) of each scheme to investors periodically. 
The specialist agencies that do non -core functions (other than investment m anagement), for an 
AMC, are called constituents. They must be registered with SEBI and appointed only with the 
approval of the trustees. They are paid a fee for their services by the mutual fund. 
Constituent Role 
Custodian Holds and settles funds and securities 
R&T Agent Keeps and services investor records 
Banks Enable collections and payments 

=== PAGE 171 ===
 
171 
 
Auditor Audits scheme accounts 
Distributors Distribute fund products to investors 
Brokers Execute transactions in securities 
 
5.3 Types of Open-ended Mutual Fund Products 
Mutual funds provide a convenient way for investors to invest in different asset classes. The 
investment objective of the fund will determine the asset class in which the fund invests and the 
portfolio of securities created. For example, if the investment objective of the fund is to provide 
growth and appreciation in the value of the investment, the portfolio is likely to hold equity 
instruments. If the objective is to provide regular income then the portfolio will have debt 
securities.  
SEBI has broadly classified the open ended mutual funds into 5 categories: 
 Equity  
 Debt  
 Hybrid  
 Solution Oriented 
 Other  
5.3.1 Types of Equity Schemes 
Equity funds invest in a portfolio of equity shares and equity related instruments. The return and 
risk of the fund will be similar to investing in equity. Investors in equity funds seek growth and 
capital appreciation as their primary objective and should ideally have a long investment horizon 
that will allow time for the investment to appre ciate in value and not be affected by short -term 
fluctuations. 
The types of equity funds are as follows: 
Multi Cap Fund : An open ended equity scheme investing across large cap, mid cap, small cap 
stocks.57 The minimum investment in equity and equity related instruments shall be 75 percent of 
                                                           
57 Large Cap companies are 1 st-100th companies in term of full market capitalisation. Mid cap companies are 101 st -
250th companies in term of full market capitalisation. Small cap companies are 251st company onwards in terms of full 
market capitalisation. (Note: If a stock is listed on more than one recognised stock exchange, an average of full market 
capitalisation of the stock o n all such stock exchanges will be computed. In case a stock is listed on only one stock 
exchange, the full market capitalisation of that stock on such an exchange will be considered. This list would be 

=== PAGE 172 ===
 
172 
 
total assets with minimum investment of 25 percent in equity and equity related instruments each 
in large cap, mid cap and small cap companies.58 
Large Cap Fund: An open ended equity scheme predominantly investing in large cap stocks. The 
minimum investment in equity and equity related instruments of large cap companies shall be 80 
percent of total assets. 
Large and Mid-Cap Fund: An open ended equity scheme investing in b oth large cap and mid cap 
stocks. The minimum investment in equity and equity related instruments of large cap companies 
shall be 35 percent of total assets. The minimum investment in equity and equity related 
instruments of mid cap stocks shall be 35 percent of total assets. 
Mid Cap Fund : An open ended equity scheme predominantly investing in mid cap stocks. The 
minimum investment in equity and equity related instruments of mid cap companies shall be 65 
percent of total assets. 
Small cap Fund : An open ended equity scheme predominantly investing in small cap stocks. 
Minimum investment in equity and equity related instruments of small cap companies shall be 65 
percent of total assets. 
Flexi Cap Fund: An open -ended, dynamic equity scheme that invests acros s different market 
capitalizations (i.e. large cap, mid -cap, and small cap). The minimum investment in equity and 
equity-related instruments should be 65 percent of the total assets of the scheme.59 
Dividend Yield Fund: An open ended equity scheme predominantly investing in dividend yielding 
stocks. Scheme should predominantly invest in dividend yielding stocks. The minimum investment 
in equity shall be 65 percent of total assets. 
Value Fund or Contra Fund : A value fund is an open ended equity scheme followi ng a value 
investment strategy. Minimum investment in equity & equity related instruments shall be 65 
percent of total assets.  A contra fund is an open ended equity scheme following contrarian 
investment strategy. Minimum investment in equity & equity related instruments shall be 65 
percent of total assets. Mutual Funds are permitted to offer either Value fund or Contra fund. 
                                                           
uploaded on the AMFI website and the same would be up dated every six months based on the data as on the end of 
June and December of each year. The data shall be available on the AMFI website within 5 calendar days from the 
end of 6 months period.) 
58 SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DF3/CIR/P/2020/172 dated Sep tember 11, 2020 on Asset allocation on Multi Cap 
Funds. 
59 SEBI vide Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DF3/CIR/P/2020/228 dated November 6, 2020 has introduced a new category 
of funds under Equity scheme. 

=== PAGE 173 ===
 
173 
 
Focused Fund: An open ended equity scheme investing in maximum 30 stocks (the scheme needs 
to mention where it intends to focus, viz, multi cap, large cap, mid cap, small cap). Minimum 
investment in equity & equity related instruments shall be 65 percent of total assets. 
Sectoral/ Thematic : An open ended equity scheme investing in a specific sector such as bank, 
power is a sectoral fund. While an open ended equity scheme investing in line with an investment 
theme such as housing, infrastructure is a thematic fund. For example, an infrastructure thematic 
fund might invest in shares of companies that are into infrastructure, construction, cement, steel, 
telecom, power etc. The minimum investment in equity & equity related instruments of a 
particular sector/ particular theme shall be 80 percent of total assets. 
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Investing:60 In order to increase the quantum of and 
facilitate green financing, SEBI has introduced a separate sub-category for ESG investments under 
the thematic category of Equity schemes.  Mutual Funds may launch any schemes under this sub-
category with one of the following ESG strategies: 
a.      Exclusion 
b.      Integration 
c.      Best-in-class & Positive Screening 
d.      Impact investing 
e.      Sustainable objectives 
f.      Transition or transition related investments 
 
Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS): An open ended equity linked saving scheme with a statutory 
lock in of 3 years and tax benefit. The minimum investment in equity and eq uity related 
instruments shall be 80 percent of total assets (in accordance with Equity Linked Saving Scheme, 
2005 notified by the Ministry of Finance). 
ELSS provides tax benefits in the form of deductions under section 80C of the Income Tax Act for 
the amount invested. The maximum limit for claiming deduction u/s 80C is Rs. 1.5 lakh per financial 
year. However, this tax benefit is available only under the old income tax regime. Taxpayer s who 
opt for new tax regime are not eligible to claim this deduction. These investments are subject to a 
three-year lock-in period to get the tax benefit. 
5.3.2 Types of Debt Schemes 
Debt funds invest in debt securities issued by the government, public sector units, banks and 
private limited companies. Debt securities may have different features. For example: 
                                                           
60 SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/IMD-I-PoD1/P/CIR/2023/125 dated July 20, 2023 on New category of Mutual Fund 
Schemes for ESG Investing and related disclosures by Mutual Funds. 

=== PAGE 174 ===
 
174 
 
 They may be short -term or long -term. Short term securities include treasury bills of the 
government, commercial paper and certificates of deposit. Long -term securities include 
government securities and bonds issued by public sector units (PSU) and companies. 
 They may have credit risk or the risk of default, such as corporate bonds or have no credit risk, 
such as government securities. 
 They may have high or low mark to market (MTM) risk, which is the change in the price of the 
securities in response to a change in interest rates. The market value of a debt security changes 
are inversely proportionate to changes in the market interest rat es. Higher the tenor of the 
security greater is the impact of change in interest rates on the price of the security.  This 
means: 
o If interest rates increase, value of debt instruments fall. Higher the tenor of the instrument, 
greater the fall in mark-to-market value. 
o If interest rates fall, value of debt instruments rise. Higher the tenor of the instrument, 
greater the rise in mark-to-market value. 
Debt funds create different portfolios whose returns will be drawn from various combinations of 
coupon income and appreciation or depreciation from a change in price.  
 A fund with short -term debt securities will earn primarily coupon income. There will be very 
low gains or losses from MTM risks. If interest rates are moving up, these funds will post a 
higher return from higher coupon incomes reflecting the higher rate, and lower impact from 
MTM loss from increase in interest rates, due to the shorter tenor of the securities held in the 
portfolio. 
 A fund with long-term debt securities will earn higher coupon income because the tenor of the 
securities is longer. They will also earn higher capital gains or losses from MTM due to the long 
tenor. If the interest rates fall, these funds will post a higher return reflecting the higher MTM 
gains from decrease in interest rates, due to their higher average maturity. 
A fund holding bonds with credit risk earns higher coupon income since the issuers have to pay 
higher interest rates to compensate the investors for default risk. The credit risk associated with 
the fund is indicated by the credit rating of the securities held in the portfolio. 
The types of debt funds are as follows: 
Overnight Fund: An open ended debt scheme investing in overnight securities. The investment is 
in overnight securities having maturity of 1 day.61 
                                                           
61 Provisions of SEBI Circular No SEBI/IMD/DF/19/2010 dated November 26, 2010 shall be followed for Uniform cut -
off timings for applicability of Net Asset Value in respect of Liquid Fund and Overnight Fund.  

=== PAGE 175 ===
 
175 
 
Liquid Fund : An open ended liquid scheme whose investment is into debt and money market 
securities with maturity of upto 91 days only.62 
Ultra Short Duration Fund : An open ended ultra -short term debt scheme investing in debt and 
money market instruments with Macaulay duration between 3 months and 6 months. 
Low Duration Fund : An open ended low duration debt scheme investing in debt and money 
market instruments with Macaulay duration between 6 months and 12 months. 
Money Market Fund: An open ended debt scheme investing in money market instruments having 
maturity upto 1 year. 
Short Duration Fund: An open ended short term debt scheme investing in debt and money market 
instruments with Macaulay duration between 1 year and 3 years. 
Medium Duration Fund: An open ended medium term debt scheme investing in debt and money 
market instruments with Macaulay duration of the portfolio being between 3 years and 4 years. 
Portfolio Macaulay duration under anticipated adverse situation is 1 year to 4 years. 
Medium to Long Duration Fund: An open ended medium term debt scheme investing in debt and 
money market instruments with Macaulay duration between 4 years and 7 years. Portfolio 
Macaulay duration under anticipated adverse situation is 1 year to 7 years. 
Long Dura tion Fund : An open ended debt scheme investing in debt and money market 
instruments with Macaulay duration greater than 7 years 
Dynamic Bond: An open ended dynamic debt scheme investing across duration. 
Corporate Bond Fund : An open ended debt scheme predom inantly investing in AA+ and above 
rated corporate bonds. The minimum investment in corporate bonds shall be 80 percent of total 
assets (only in AA+ and above rated corporate bonds)  
Credit Risk Fund : An open ended debt scheme predominantly investing in AA and below rated 
corporate bonds. The minimum investment in corporate bonds shall be 65 percent of total assets 
(only in AA (excludes AA+ rated corporate bonds) and below rated corporate bonds).63 
                                                           
62 All provisions mentioned in SEBI circular SEBI/IMD/CIR No.13/150975/09 dated January 19, 2009 in respect of liquid 
schemes shall be applicable. Also, provisions of SEBI Circular No SEBI/I MD/DF/19/2010 dated November 26, 2010 
shall be followed for Uniform cut -off timings for applicability of Net Asset Value in respect of Liquid Fund and 
Overnight Fund. 
63 Vide SEBI Circular (SEBI/HO/IMD/DF3/CIR/P/2017/114 October 6, 2017 ) words/ phrases that highlight/ emphasize 
only the return aspect of the scheme shall not be used in the name of the scheme (for instance Credit Opportunities 
Fund, High Yield Fund, Credit Advantage etc.) 

=== PAGE 176 ===
 
176 
 
Banking and PSU Fund: An open ended debt scheme predominantly investing in debt instruments 
of banks, Public Sector Undertakings, Public Financial Institutions and Municipal Bonds.  The 
minimum investment in such instruments should be 80 percent of total assets. 
Gilt Fund: An open ended debt scheme investing in government securities across maturity. The 
minimum investment in G-secs is defined to be 80 percent of total assets (across maturity). 
Gilt Fund with 10-year constant duration: An open ended debt scheme investing in government 
securities having a constant maturity of 10 years. The minimum investment is defined to be 80 
percent of total assets such that the Macaulay duration of the portfolio is equal to 10 years. 
Floater Fund: An open ended debt scheme predominantly investing in floating rate instruments 
(including fixed rate instruments converted to floating rate exposures using swaps/derivatives). 
Minimum investment in floating rate instruments (including fixed rate instruments converted to 
floating rate exposures using swaps/derivatives) shall be 65 percent of total assets. 
5.3.3 Types of Hybrid Schemes 
Hybrid funds hold a portfolio of both equity and debt securities. The investment objective of the 
fund will determine the allocation of the portfolio between the two asset classes. A hybrid fund is 
a debt and an equity fund, rolled into one. The risk in a hybrid fund will primarily depend upon the 
allocation between equity and debt, and the relative performance of these asset classes. The 
higher the equity component in the portfolio, the greater will be the overall risk.  
The types of hybrid funds are as follows: 
Conservative Hybrid Fund: An op en ended hybrid scheme investing predominantly in debt 
instruments. Investment in debt instruments shall be between 75 percent and 90 percent of total 
assets while investment in equity and equity instruments shall be between 10 percent and 25 
percent of total assets. 
Balanced Hybrid Fund: An open ended balanced scheme investing in equity and debt instruments. 
The investment in equity and equity related instruments shall be between 40 percent and 60 
percent of total assets while investment in debt instrument s shall be between 40 percent and 60 
percent. No arbitrage is permitted in this scheme. 
Aggressive Hybrid Fund:  An open ended hybrid scheme investing predominantly in equity and 
equity related instruments. Investment in equity and equity related instruments shall be between 
65 percent and 80 percent of total assets while investment in debt instruments shall be between 
20 percent and 35 percent of total assets. 
Mutual funds in India are permitted to offer either Aggressive Hybrid Fund or Balanced Fund. 

=== PAGE 177 ===
 
177 
 
Dynamic Asset Allocation or Balanced Advantage: An open ended dynamic asset allocation fund 
with investment in equity/debt that is managed dynamically. 
Multi Asset Allocation: An open ended scheme investing in at least three asset classes with a 
minimum allocation of at least 10 percent each in all three asset classes. Foreign securities are not 
treated as a separate asset class in this kind of scheme. 
Arbitrage Fund:  An open ended scheme investing in arbitrage opportunities. The minimum 
investment in equity and equity related instruments shall be 65 percent of total assets. 
Arbitrage funds aim at taking advantage of the price differential between the cash and the 
derivatives markets. Arbitrage is defined as simultaneous purchase and sale of an asset to take  
advantage of difference in prices in different markets. The difference between the future and the 
spot price of the same underlying is an interest element, representing the interest on the amount 
invested in spot, which can be realised on a future date, w hen the future is sold. The price 
differential between spot and futures is locked in if positions are held until expiry of the derivative 
cycle. On settlement date both positions are closed at the same price, to realize the difference. A 
completely hedged position makes these funds a low -risk investment proposition. They feature 
lower volatility in NAV, similar to that of a liquid fund. 
Equity Savings : An open ended scheme investing in equity, arbitrage and debt. The minimum 
investment in equity and equity related instruments shall be 65 percent of total assets and 
minimum investment in debt shall be 10 percent of total assets. The minimum hedged & unhedged 
investment needs to be stated in the Scheme Information Document (SID). Asset Allocation under 
defensive considerations may also be stated in the Offer Document. 
5.3.4 Solution Oriented Schemes 
The solution oriented mutual fund schemes help in attaining goals such as retirement and higher 
education for children. 
Retirement Fund: An open ended retirement solution oriented scheme having a lock-in of 5 years 
or till retirement age (whichever is earlier).  
Children’s Fund: An open ended fund for investment for children having a lock -in for at least 5 
years or till the child attains age of majority (whichever is earlier).  
5.3.5 Other Schemes 
Index Funds/ Exchange Traded Fund: An open ended scheme replicating/ tracking a specific index. 
The minimum investment in securities of a particular index (which is being replicated/ tracked) 
shall be 95 percent of total assets. 

=== PAGE 178 ===
 
178 
 
Exchange traded funds (ETF) combine features of an open-ended fund and a stock. Units are issued 
directly to investors when the scheme is launched.  Post this period, units are listed on a stock 
exchange like a stock and traded. Units purchased at the time of launch or bought from the stock 
markets are credited to the demat account of the investor. Transactions are done through brokers 
of the exchange. Investors need a broking account and a d emat account to invest in ETFs.  The 
prices of the ETF units on the stock exchange are linked to the NAV of the fund, but prices are 
available on a real-time basis depending on trading volume on the stock exchanges.  
Gold ETFs are ETFs with gold as the underlying asset. The following are the features: 
 It provides a way to hold gold in electronic form rather than in physical form.  
 Typically, each unit of gold ETF represents one gram of gold.  
 The fund holds physical gold and gold receipts representing the units issued. 
 Price of the units will move in line with the price of gold. 
 
Amendments were notified to SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations to introduce Silver ETFs in Indian 
securities markets. Silver ETFs are mutual fund schemes that invest primarily in silver and silver 
related instruments. SEBI in its recent circular has detailed out the operating norms of silver ETFs.64 
The commodity based funds, such as Gold ETFs and Silver ETFs, are to be managed by a dedicated 
fund manager with relevant skill and experience in commodities mar ket including commodity 
derivatives market. The NAV of these ETFs are to be disclosed on a daily basis on the website of 
the AMC. 
Fund of Funds (Overseas/ Domestic) : An open ended fund of fund scheme investing in an 
underlying fund. The minimum investment in the underlying fund shall be 95 percent of total 
assets. 
Fund of Funds ( FoF) selects funds that meets its investment objectives and invests in them. Its 
portfolio is not made up of securities, but is a portfolio of other funds. Most FoFs invest in schemes 
of the same mutual fund. Some FoFs consider schemes across fund houses which meet the FoF’s 
investment objective for inclusion in the portfolio. 
5.4  Types of Closed ended Mutual Fund Schemes 
Some of the closed ended mutual fund schemes are discussed below: 
                                                           
64 Vide SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DF2/CIR/P/2021/668 dated November 24, 2021 on Norms for Silver ETFs and 
Gold ETFs. 

=== PAGE 179 ===
 
179 
 
5.4.1 Fixed Maturity Plans 
Fixed Maturity Plans (FMP) are closed -ended funds that invest in securities whose maturity 
matches the term of the scheme.  The scheme and the securities that it holds mature together at 
the end of the stated tenor. The fund pays out the maturity proceeds of the portfolio on the closing 
date. Investors who are able to hold the scheme to maturity will be able to benefit from the returns 
of the FMP that are locked in when the portfolio is created. There is no risk o f the value of the 
securities being lower at the time when the fund matures (unless there is a default) since the 
instruments will also be redeemed at their face value on maturity. 
 The time for which the investor is willing to invest must match the term of the fund. 
 The primary risk in FMPs is credit risk from a possible default by the issuer. 
As closed-end funds, these schemes are listed on stock exchanges where they may be traded at 
prices related to the NAV. 
5.4.2 Infrastructure Debt Funds 
Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDF) are closed-ended schemes with a tenor of at least five years that 
invest in debt securities and securitised debt of infrastructure companies. 90 percent of the fund’s 
portfolio should be invested in the specified securities. The remaining can be invested in the equity 
shares of infrastructure companies and in money market instruments. The NAV of the scheme will 
be disclosed at least once each quarter. The minimum investment allowed in these schemes is Rs. 
1 crore and the minimum face value of each unit shall be Rs. 10 lakh. As a closed-ended scheme 
the units of the scheme will be listed on a stock exchange. An Infrastructure Debt Fund can be set 
up by an existing mutual fund or a new fund set up for this purpose. The sponsor and key personnel 
must have adequate experience in the infrastructure sector to be able to launch the scheme. 
5.4.3 Real Estate Mutual Funds 
Real estate mutual funds invest in real estate either in the form of physical property or in the form 
of securities of companies engaged in the real estate business. SEBI regulations require that at 
least 35 percent of the portfolio should be held in physical assets. Securities that these funds can 
invest in include mortgage -backed securities and debt issuances of compa nies engaged in real 
estate projects. Not less than 75 percent of the net assets of the scheme shall be in physical assets 
and such securities. Assets held by the fund will be valued every 90 days by two valuers accredited 
by a credit rating agency. The lo wer of the two values will be taken to calculate the NAV. These 
funds are closed-end funds and have to be listed on a stock exchange. 
5.5 Investment approaches – active and passive 
Mutual funds follow either of two main investment approaches: active or passive.  

=== PAGE 180 ===
 
180 
 
5.5.1 Active Investing 
Active mutual funds are those which are managed actively by the fund manager and his team.  The 
objective of such funds is to generate returns that are higher than its benchmark and thus 
outperform the benchmark. To achieve this objective the fund manager and his team actively 
research different sectors and select stocks based on certain defined parameters. They also 
continuously monitor their portfolio and buy and sell stocks whenever they see the right 
opportunity. Since in -depth research is expensive, active mutual funds charge high fees. The 
frequent buying and selling of securities can add substantially to the costs of managing the fund. 
Although some actively managed funds manage to outperform their benchmark, others may not. 
It has been observed that in developed markets such as the United States, actively managed funds 
find it difficult to beat the returns of their benchmark.  
5.5.2 Passive Investing 
Passive mutual funds  do not seek to beat or outperform thei r benchmark but aim at generating 
returns that are in line with the benchmark returns . They achieve this by  simply ‘mimicking’ or 
replicating the index. Thus, the fund buys all the stocks that are constituents of the index in the 
same proportion of their weights in the index. The fund sells any stock that has been removed 
from the index and replaces it with the new stock that is included in the ind ex. Thus, a passively 
managed fund does not have a fund management team for making investment decisions. Hence 
the management fees charged by passive funds are lower than those of active funds. The returns 
of the passive fund can differ marginally from tha t of its benchmark. This difference is known as 
the ‘tracking error’ and ideally should be as close to zero as possible.   
Index funds and exchange -traded funds (ETFs) are both examples of passively managed funds. 
Index funds are bought and sold like mutua l funds. An investor buying or selling units of an index 
fund does so at the NAV determined according to the cut -off timings for that fund, the category 
of the fund and the amount of investment/redemption. ETFs are however, traded on an exchange 
just like stocks. Investors can buy or sell units of an ETF at traded prices at any time during the day. 
The price of an ETF can rise or fall in accordance with the prices of its constituent stocks. This 
makes it possible for an investor to time his purchases and sa les of units of ETFs by placing limit 
orders to buy and sell at prices below or above the prevailing price.  
Passive Funds provide various advantages such as transparency, lower costs, diversification etc. 
to its investors over active funds. With the growi ng popularity of these passive funds among 
investors globally, SEBI issued a detailed guideline on development of passive funds, following are 
a few pointers:65 
                                                           
65 SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DOF2/P/CIR/2022/69 dated May 23, 2022 on Development of Passive Funds.  

=== PAGE 181 ===
 
181 
 
1. In order to enhance liquidity in units of ETFs on stock exchange platform, direct transaction 
with AMCs are facilitated for investors only for transactions above a specified threshold of 
Rs. 25 crore. 
2. Indicative NAV (iNAV) of an ETF (i.e. the per unit NAV based on the current market value 
of its portfolio during the trading hours of the ETF) are disclosed on a continuous basis on 
the Stock Exchange(s), where the units of these ETFs are listed and traded. 
3. Mutual Funds can launch Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) as: (a) Active ELSS under 
‘Equity Schemes’ category or (b) Passive ELSS under ‘Other Schemes’ category. The passive 
ELSS scheme shall be based on one of the indices comprising of equity shares from top 250 
companies in terms of market capitalization. 
4. The closing price of the units of ETFs on Stock Exchange are used for valuation by Fund of 
Funds (FoFs) investing in such ETFs. 
 
5.6 Processes for Investing in Mutual Funds 
5.6.1 Offline and online investment modes 
Investment in mutual funds can be made in the offline or online mode. In the offline mode, the 
investor can contact a representative of the AMC or its approved distributor or their Registrar and 
Transfer Agent (RTA) by visiting their office and obtain an application form along with the Know 
Your Customer (KYC) form. After completing the KYC process as explained below and filling up the 
application form, the investor can hand over a cheque for the amount that he plans to invest. The 
mutual fund will then allot the investor a folio number. The invest or will receive an Account 
Statement after the processing of the transaction.  
Online investment can be done through the website of the AMC or through the websites of the 
RTA and the KYC process can be completed online. The investor is required to create a n account 
on the website of the AMC after entering the required details contained in the application form. 
He then has to choose the desired mutual fund scheme, the investment option (dividend or 
growth), the investment type (lump sum or in installments through a Systematic Investment Plan), 
mode of payment and bank details. The transaction is completed after the investor has verified all 
the details entered. 
Stock exchanges also provide platforms to investors for investing in mutual funds. Investors can 
buy mutual fund units through NSE MFSS and BSE StAR MF just like company shares. The investors 
are required to complete the one-time registration process with NSE and BSE to avail the facility. 
Mutual Fund Utilities (MFU) is a shared service platform for mutual fund transactions promoted 
by the mutual fund industry. Investors can invest in mutual fund units through MFU platform both 
in online and offline modes. 

=== PAGE 182 ===
 
182 
 
5.6.2 Permanent Account Number (PAN) and Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms 
All investors in mutual funds must have a Permanent Account Number or PAN. The PAN is 
mandatory information that has to be provided at the time of applying for units. The only 
exception where PAN need not be provided is where investments made by an individual investor, 
either as lumpsum or systematic investment plans , do not exceed  Rs. 50,000 per annum  per 
mutual fund. 
SEBI regulations prescribe the categories of investors who are eligible to invest in mutual fund in 
India. This includes resident individuals, Non Resident Indians ( NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin 
(PIOs), foreign nationals, Institutions and Trusts.  
Eligible investors in a mutual fund have to undergo a ‘Know Your Customer’  (KYC) procedure 
prescribed by SEBI to be able to invest in mutual funds. It needs to be done only once at the time 
of the first mutual fund  or other capital market transaction, and is valid across mutual funds and 
other capital market intermediaries. The KYC procedure may be conducted by an AMC or other 
authorised entity. It involves collecting information about the investor in the specified format and 
conducting an In -Person Verification (IP V) to verify identity, address and other personal 
information. SEBI has allowed Aadhaar based KYC (eKYC) to be used for MF investments, for the 
convenience of investors.  eKYC completely eliminates paperwork and IPV to complete the KYC 
process. CAMS / K finTech as a KYC User Agency (KUA) is approved by UIDAI to accept investor’s 
Aadhaar number and complete KYC Verification with one-time password (OTP). 
5.6.3 FATCA and CRS 
To comply with the requirements of Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and Co mmon 
Reporting Standards (CRS) provisions, financial institutions, including mutual funds, are required 
to undertake due diligence process to identify foreign reportable accounts and collect such 
information as required under the said provisions and report the same to the US Internal Revenue 
Service/any other foreign government or to the Indian Tax Authorities for onward transmission to 
the concerned foreign authorities. The application form requires information to be provided if the 
citizenship/nationality/place of birth/tax residency are places other than India for all categories of 
investors. The countries of tax residency and respective tax payer reference ID has to be provided. 
Once an investor is identified as covered under the said regulation, the entire investment value of 
all the folios held will be reported. The identity of the investors and their direct and indirect 
beneficiaries and controlling persons will be reported. If there is a change in the status of the 
investor after the information is fi rst provided then the same has to be reported to the mutual 
fund within 30 days. 
5.6.4 Purchase Transactions 
Investing in an NFO 

=== PAGE 183 ===
 
183 
 
Units of a mutual fund are first available for investing when the scheme is launched in a New Fund 
Offer (NFO).  
 The mutual fund issues scheme related documents giving all the details of the scheme being 
launched. 
 The application form for the NFO is available along with a document called the Key Information 
Memorandum (KIM) which gives the important information about the scheme and procedures 
for investing. 
 The NFO (except ELSS) will be open for a period of 15 days during which the investor has to 
make the application. Payment for the units can be made only through approved payment 
modes that are mentioned in the offe r document. These include cheque and online payment 
facilities like internet banking ( NEFT and RTGS), Application Supported by Blocked Amount 
(ASBA) etc. 
 A folio is created for each investor under which the investor’s personal information such as 
name, status, address, PAN, bank account details and investment information is captured.  
 The units of mutual fund (except ELSS) will be allotted to investors within 5 business days from 
the NFO closing date. The account statement giving details of the units allotted will be sent to 
the investor. 
Investing in the Continuous Offer  
Investors can invest in open -ended funds after the NFO period also. Sale of units on a n ongoing 
basis by an open-ended fund is called continuous offer.  The price of units in the continuous offer 
depends on the NAV of the fund, and is declared for every business day. 
 New investors use the application form to invest in a fund on continuous offer.  
 Existing investors invest using a transaction slip which requires only the folio number to be 
provided to identify the investor, apart from the investment details. 
Investors submit  the completed application form or transaction slip along  with the payment 
instrument at an Official Point of Acceptance (OPoA).  This could be the office of the AMC or an 
Investor Service Centre (ISC). 
Units are allotted to the investor based on the purchase price applicable to the transaction, which 
in turn is based on the applicable NAV at the time of the transaction. Information on units allotted 
is communicated to the investor through a Statement of Account (SoA). 
Scheme related documents 
SEBI requires that AMCs provide relevant and complete information  to help the investor take an 
informed decision to invest in mutual funds. All such information is provided in the scheme related 
documents.   

=== PAGE 184 ===
 
184 
 
The Scheme related Documents are available free of cost at any of the Investor Service Centres 
(ISCs) or AMC offices. The documents have to be in the format prescribed by SEBI. Mutual Fund 
scheme related documents consist of:  
a. Statement of Additional Information (SAI)  which has statutory information abo ut the 
mutual fund or AMC offering the scheme. 
b. Scheme Information Document (SID) which has details of the particular scheme. 
c. Key Information Memorandum (KIM) which contains all the key information that an 
investor must know before investing in the scheme. 
Riskometer 
Mutual funds depict the level of risk in the schemes through a pictorial meter called “Riskometer”. The 
riskometer for each scheme are provided on the from pages of: 
i. New Fund Offer Application Form 
ii. Scheme Information Document (SID) and  
iii. Key Information Memorandum (KIM) 
 
Also, riskometer of a mutual fund scheme is displayed on the advertisements for better 
understanding of the prospective investors about the potential risk.  
 
 
Fund Fact Sheet 
Apart from scheme related documents, information to investors are also provided through fund 
Fact Sheet. A Fund Factsheet is a monthly report made available to investors by a mutual fund 
manager. This factsheet discloses all information as required by SEBI such as the objective of the 
fund, its category, plan options offered to investors, Assets under Management, its benchmark, 
minimum amount required to be invested and exit load. The factsheet also reveals the riskiness of 
the fund using the Riskometer. Details of the fund manager’s experienc e, educational 


=== PAGE 185 ===
 
185 
 
qualifications and performance details of other funds are provided. The factsheet details the 
portfolio allocation, the top 10 holdings and sector-wise and company-wise allocation. Data about 
historical performance of the fund are also provided along with key ratios and their significance.      
Stock Exchange Channel 
Units of mutual funds can be transacted on the stock exchange through the stock brokers who 
have obtained an AMFI Registration Number (ARN) and are certified mutual fund distributors who 
have obtained the necessary permission from the stock exchange. Both purchase and redemption 
of units can be done using this channel. The units need to be held in demateriali sed form to be 
able to conduct transactions through this channel.  Units purchased will be credited to the 
investor’s demat account and funds on redemption to their bank account. 
Payment Instruments 
Investors can make payments for investments in mutual funds using cash, cheques and electronic 
payment modes such as NEFT, RTGS, ASBA66 etc. Payments must be made from a bank account in 
which the first holder of the mutual fund folio is an account holder. Cash payment permitted upto 
Rs. 50,000 per mutual fund house for purchases  and demand draft is accepted as payment 
instrument only in specific situations as specified by the mutual fund. 
Joint Holders 
A mutual fund folio can have up to three holders as joint holders. The requirements of PAN and 
KYC formalities have to be undergo ne by all the holders. The mode of operating the investment 
account can be specified as’ joint’ where all the holders will jointly operate the account by signing 
for all transactions. Or the account can be operated as ‘either or survivor’ where any of the holders 
can sign to conduct transaction. 
5.6.5 Redemptions 
Redemption refers to encashing or withdrawing the investment made in a mutual fund by selling 
the units back to the mutual fund. Investments made in an open-ended fund can be redeemed at 
any time at the current applicable NAV. Units of a closed-ended fund can be redeemed only when 
the fund matures.  
Investors redeeming units have to specify the amount being redeemed or the number of units. 
The redemption request has to be signed by the holders accor ding to the mode of holding. If the 
mode of holding is ‘joint’ then all the holders have to sign. If it is ‘either or survivor’ then any one 
holder can sign. The redemption request has to be sent to the AMC offices or investor service 
                                                           
66 Application Supported by Blocked Amount - This is a facility where the investment application is accompanied by an 
authorization to the bank to block the amount of the application money in the investor’s bank account.  ASBA, which 
was originally envisaged for public issues in the capital market, has now been extended to mutual fund NFOs.  

=== PAGE 186 ===
 
186 
 
centre. The applicable NAV is adjusted for any exit loads before calculating the redemption 
amount. 
Example: 
Units redeemed 500 
Applicable NAV: Rs. 24 
Exit load: 1 percent 
Price per unit for redemption: Rs.24 x (1-0.01) = Rs.24- 0.24 = Rs. 23.76 
Redemption Amount: 500 x Rs.23.76 = Rs. 11880  
SEBI has made it mandatory for investors to provide their bank account details to the mutual fund 
in the application form at the time of buying the units. Redemptions are either made directly into 
the bank account, or by cheque on which the bank account details are pre-printed. This is to avoid 
fraudulent encashment of redemption cheque in case they are intercepted before they reach the 
investor. Investors can register up to 5 bank accounts with a mutual fund. One of the accounts is 
designated as the default account into which credits are made. Investors can choose to receive 
credits to any of the other accounts registered , change the default account or the registered 
accounts by following the procedure prescribed for the same. 
5.6.6 Non-Financial Transactions 
Investors in a mutual fund may need to conduct certain transactions that do not have a financial 
implication. This includes change in the address, bank account details, joint holder information  
and the like. The transaction slip with the folio number to identify the investor and details of the 
change and supporting documents have to be provided to the appropriate agency as indicated by 
the fund to affect the change. It is possible to effect chan ges to details such as address for 
communication, KYC changes, across various mutual funds using such centrali sed agencies. The 
changes will be verified and communicated to R&T agents to update the records of the investor. 
5.6.7 Proof of Investment and Transaction: Statement of Accounts 
Statement of account (SoA) is the proof of the investment made by the investor in a mutual fund. 
The R&T agents, on behalf of mutual funds, dispatch a SoA after every transaction. A consolidated 
account statement (CAS) across mutual fund holdings is sent to the investor for each calendar 
month where there have been transactions in a folio. Folios where no transactions have taken 
place during a six-month period will receive a statement at the end of such six-month period. 
A SoA is first sent when an investor makes a fresh purchase transaction. The amount, price, and 
units are shown in the statement. For subsequent transactions, apart from these details, the 
balance units in the folio, their NAV, their current market value, average Total Expense Ratio and 
gross commission paid to distributors are also shown.  

=== PAGE 187 ===
 
187 
 
Units in Demat Form 
Investors in mutual funds are also given the option of holding the units in demateriali sed form. 
The units allotted will be credited to the demat account of the investor. Existing units can also be 
dematerialised. Purchases and sale of units held in this form are done through a stock broker. The 
investor will have to directly bear the costs of maintaining the demat  account and transacting 
through the broker. 
5.6.8 Distributor Commission 
Mutual funds pay a trail commission which is based on the period for which the investment 
brought in remains with the fund and is a percentage of the current value of the investments. Trail 
commission is paid periodically to distributors and represents a steady source of income  as long 
as the investor stays in the fund.  SEBI has allowed m utual funds to adopt full  trail model of 
commission in all schemes, without payment of any upfront commission or upfronting of any trail 
commission. However, upfronting of trail commission is allowed only in case of inflows through 
Systematic Investment Plans (SIPs) subject to certain conditions as mentioned in relevant circulars. 
5.7 Systematic Transactions 
Transactions with mutual funds can be automated by signing on for the facility of systematic 
transactions offered by mutual funds. This can be for purchases, redemptions or transfers from 
one scheme to another. Investors specify the details of the periodic transactions to be done at the 
time of initiating the facility. The mutual fund will periodically execute the systematic transactions 
as directed. The details that have to be specified are: 
 Type of transaction: Purchases, redemptions, transfers. 
 Period: Length of time for which the transactions will run, say one year. 
 Periodicity of transactions: The frequency of transactions, say monthly, quarterly, half 
yearly. 
 Day of transaction: the day of the month on which each transaction will be executed, s ay 
15th of the month.  
 Amount: For each transaction and the total amount intended to be invested over a defined 
period. 
5.7.1 Systematic Investment Plans (SIP) 
SIPs enable investors to invest a fixed sum periodically into a mutual fund scheme. Assume that 
an investor registers an SIP for Rs.5000 over a year, to be executed monthly on the 5th.  This means 
the following: 
 Rs.5000 will be debited from the investor’s bank account and invested in the mutual fund 
scheme on the 5th of every month. 
 Rs.60000 will be invested over the 12-month period. 

=== PAGE 188 ===
 
188 
 
 The number of units bought will depend on the NAV on each date of investment. 
 A statement of accounts showing the units balance and their value will be sent on a 
quarterly basis to the investor. 
 The investor can continue the SIP after 12 months, or keep the money invested. 
Redemption can be done at any time as required by the investor. 
The investment is thus staggered over time, reducing the risk of investing a lump sum at a specific 
time. Since a fixed amount is being inv ested, larger number of units is bought when price is low 
and smaller number of units is bought when price is high. Systematic investment thus lowers the 
average cost of purchase. This strategy is called as rupee cost averaging. 
5.7.2 Systematic Withdrawal Plans (SWP) 
SWPs allow investors to make periodic redemptions from their existing mutual fund investments 
at the prevailing NAV related price. Assume an investor initiates an SWP for a 12- month period to 
withdraw Rs.5000 each month starting on the 5th September. This means the following: 
 On 5 th of each month starting from September the fund will automatically redeem the 
number of units required to get a value of Rs. 5000. For example, if the NAV on 5 th 
September is Rs.20 and there is no exit load then 250 units (Rs.5000/Rs.20) will be 
redeemed.  
 The amount will be sent to the investor by cheque or credited to his bank account, 
according to the mode chosen by him. 
 The investor’s unit balance will reduce each month  to the extent of units redeemed. The 
number of units redeemed each month will be different depending upon the NAV on the 
5th of the month. 
 A statement of accounts showing the details of the transactions done, the balance units 
and their value will be sent every quarter. 
 The redemption will continue for a 12- month period from the starting month. 
 If on any redemption date, the balance units available in the folio are insufficient to 
generate Rs.5000, then the entire units will be redeemed and the folio will be closed. 
 At the end of the period specified the withdrawal will stop and the remaining units will stay 
in the investor’s folio. 
SWP enables investors to periodically book their profits in an investment. Investors are also able 
to generate a regular income by redeeming few units periodically. 
5.7.3 Systematic Transfer Plans (STP) 
STPs permit investors to periodically transfer a specified sum from one scheme to another within 
the same fund house. The transfer is considered as redemption from the scheme from which 
transfer is made (source scheme) and investment into the scheme in whi ch the redemption 

=== PAGE 189 ===
 
189 
 
proceeds are invested (destination scheme). In effect it is an SWP from the source scheme and an 
SIP into the destination scheme, on the specified dates. 
An investor starts a monthly STP from a liquid fund to an equity fund over a 6 month period starting 
from 5th September for an amount of Rs. 10,000. This means the following: 
 The source scheme is the liquid fund and the destination scheme is the equity fund. 
 On the 5th of September, Rs. 10,000 worth of units will be redeemed from the liquid fund 
at the NAV prevailing on that date. NAV has to be adjusted for exit loads, if applicable.  
 On the same date the amount will be invested in the equity fund at the NAV of the fund.  
 The number of units redeemed from the liquid fund and the number of units bought in the 
equity fund will not be the same each month but will depend upon the NAV prevailing at 
the time in each scheme. 
 The STP will stop at the end of six months. The holding in the liquid fund would have 
reduced over the period and the holding in the equity fund would have increased.  
 A statement of account giving the details of the transactions done and the unit balances 
and value will be sent to the investor every quarter. 
 
5.8 Switches 
Switch is redemption and purchase transaction rolled into one and can be done for any amount 
and on any date as required by the investor. Switch is a single transaction executed on a given 
date and is not a series of transactions. The scheme from which units are redeemed and money is 
switched out is called the source scheme. The destination or target scheme is the scheme into 
which money is switched in and units purchased. Switch can also be done from one option to 
another. For example, an investor who has chose n a growth option can switch to a dividend 
option. The transaction slip is used for directing the switch and the details of the existing scheme, 
the new scheme, and the amount to be switched need to be provided. On the date of the 
submission of the switch request, the amount will be redeemed from the existing scheme at the 
applicable NAV after considering loads and invested into the new scheme at the current NAV. A 
statement of account will be sent giving details of the transaction. 
 
5.9 Reading Mutual Fund Information 
Investing in a mutual fund requires information to assess the suitability and the performance of 
the fund. 
Mutual funds are required by regulation to provide information periodically to investors.  
 The Scheme related Document are issued and updated periodically so that investors have the 
latest information. 

=== PAGE 190 ===
 
190 
 
 Product brochures issued by the mutual fund provide information about the performance, 
portfolio and strategies of a fund. 
 Fund factsheets disclose the scheme portfolios and returns genera ted by the fund relative to 
the benchmark on a monthly basis.  
 Other sources of information include SEBI and AMFI ’s website and the publications by 
investment websites, magazines and other rating and ranking agencies.  
 
5.10 Benefits and Costs of Investing in Mutual Funds 
Mutual funds offer investors an alternate investment route to invest in asset classes such as 
equity, debt, real estate securities with the benefit of a diversified portfolio managed by 
professional investment managers. The benefits of investing in mutual funds are summarized 
below: 
 Diversification 
Investors can invest in a diversified portfolio with small amounts, sometimes as low as Rs. 500. 
Investors will find it difficult to bring meaningful diversification to a self -managed portfolio with 
such a small amount.  
 Professional Management 
Investment decisions in a mutual fund are made by fund managers who have the expertise, 
information and knowledge to make better decisions than what a typical individual investor may 
be able to make. 
 Liquidity 
Mutual funds are liquid. Investors can withdraw their investments at any time by either redeeming 
units from the fund or selling the units on the stock exchange where it is listed at a price that 
reflects the current value of the portfolio. 
 Flexibility 
Mutual funds allow investors the flexibility to structure their investments in a way that suits them. 
They can choose to make lump-sum investments or periodic small investments. Similarly, they can 
choose to receive periodic returns in the form of dividends or to allow the returns to grow in value 
over time. 
 Tax efficiency 

=== PAGE 191 ===
 
191 
 
Mutual funds provide tax-efficient returns since the income is earned and gains are made by the 
fund. The mutual fund itself is exempt from paying taxes. Taxes may apply on  income earned/ 
capital gains realised by the investor, subject to prevalent tax laws. 
 Accessibility 
Mutual funds invest in securities that investors may otherwise not be able to access. Instruments 
such as wholesale debt instruments, privately placed and unlisted securities may not be accessible 
to the retail investor. Mutual funds can invest in them on behalf of the investor. 
However, these benefits come at a cost to the investor.  
 Costs and Fees 
The investor pays a fee for the benefit of holding a managed portfolio of securities. The expenses 
charged include the fee for fund management and the costs associated with the operations of the 
fund, such as transactions done and fees paid to the various constituents used by the fund.  
 Limited Control 
The investors of a mutual fund do not approve or authorize any investment decision made by the 
fund manager. The control the investors have in the way the fund is managed is limited. 
 Indirect Ownership 
The investments made by the mutual fund from the investors’ money are held in the name of the 
mutual fund trust and not directly in the name of the investors. The investors are only the 
beneficial owners of the investments. 
5.11 Regulation of Mutual Funds 
A mutual fund is authorised by regulations to pool funds from i nvestors and invest the funds on 
their behalf.  SEBI is the primary regulator of mutual funds in India. Only entities registered with 
SEBI under the SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 can conduct the business of a mutual fund. 
The regulatory provisions are designed to protect the interests of the investors who invest in a 
fund. 
5.11.1 Features of Mutual Fund Regulation 
 A mutual fund is created as trust. The investors’ funds and investments are held in this trust. 
The trust has trustees who are responsible for ensuring that the fund’s managers manage the 
funds in the investors’ interest and according to the stated objectives and regulations. 
Investor’s money is held independently and not in the AMC’s balance sheet. 
 The track record and capital that the pro moters of AMCs should have and the role and 
responsibilities of the trustees and AMC have been defined in the regulations. 

=== PAGE 192 ===
 
192 
 
 Mutual fund schemes cannot be offered to the public before the approval of the trustees and 
SEBI. The format and details of disclosures to be provided in the scheme related documents is 
defined in the regulations.  
 The investment portfolio has to adhere to the scheme objectives and be well diversified. The 
regulations specify limits on investments that the fund manager can make in a portfolio so that 
the risk to the investor is managed. The valuation of securities held in a portfolio and 
accounting for income and expenses are defined by SEBI regulations. This ensures that 
investors get a correct representation of the value of their investments. 
 The types of expenses that a mutual fund can charge to a scheme and the limits on these 
expenses are subject to SEBI regulations. This is to ensure that investors do not pay an 
unreasonably high fee for the services of the fund managers. 
 SEBI regul ation prescribes periodic reporting of the fund’s performance and investment 
details to the investors. The content and format of reporting information is specified by SEBI. 
For example, an equity fund has to publish its returns along with the return of the benchmark 
indices with which the AMC and trustees would compare the performance of the scheme  so 
that investors are able to assess how the fund has performed relative to the markets in which 
the fund has invested.  
 The AMC has to make periodic reports and  disclosures to SEBI, trustees and the Board of 
Directors of the AMC. 
 SEBI has laid down a detailed Risk Management Framework for mutual funds, which lays down 
the roles of top management officials of the mutual fund. Mutual funds are required to identify 
the major risks faced by the mutual fund, measure and manage such risks and report the same 
to SEBI. 
5.12 Investor Service Standards 
SEBI regulations lay down the rights of investors and the time frame within which the service has 
to be provided. Some of the important services that investors need to be provided with include: 
 Investors have to be given information on the NAV, sale and redemption prices on a daily basis.  
 Units should be allotted within 5 business days of the closing date of the NFO and on the 
transaction date for on -going funds, subject to rules regarding realisation of payments made 
by investors. 
 Investors should be sent periodic account statements on their transactions and investment 
balances. 

=== PAGE 193 ===
 
193 
 
 Dividends and redemption proceeds should be sent to the investor within 15 days of dividend 
declaration67 and 10 working days of redemption request respectively.68  
 Investor Charter for the Mutual Funds is issued by SEBI that details out the types of services 
provided by the mutual fund along with timelines.69 The investor charter is to be displayed on 
the websites of the AMCs. 
 The Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI) is the industry body that recommends best 
practices and code of conduct to be followed by the AMCs and distributors of mutual funds in 
the interests of the investors. 
 To ensure that mutual funds exercise their voting rights at company general meetings in the 
interest of their unit holders, SEBI has made it compulsory for mutual funds to vote on 
specified resolutions. These resolutions include matters of corporate governance, changes to 
the company’s capital structure, management compensation, social and corporate 
responsibility issues, appointment and removal of directors, related party transactions and 
such other issues, which could affect the interest of the unitholders.70  
5.13 Specialized Investment Fund71 
SEBI in its recent amendment to SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, has introduced a new product 
line under mutual funds known as Specialized Investment Fund (SIF). SIFs are sophisticated mutual 
funds where the minimum required investment amount is Rs. 10 lakhs from the investors across 
all investment strategies. 
 
                                                           
67 Vide SEBI (Mutual Funds) (Amendment) Regulations, 2021 effective from March 5, 2021.  
68 In the event of delays in dispatching dividend warrants or redemption/repurchase cheques, the AMC has to pay the 
unitholder, interest at the rate of 15 percent p.a. This expense has to be borne by the AMC i.e. it cannot be charged 
to the scheme. 
69 Vide SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD -II/IMD-II_DOF10/P/CIR/2021/00677 dated December 10, 2021 on Investor 
Charter and disclosure of investor complaints by Mutual Funds on their websites and AMFI  websites. 
70 SEBI Circular No.: SEBI/HO/IMD/DF4/CIR/P/2021/29 dated March 5, 2021, on Guidelines for votes cast by Mutual 
Funds. 
71 Vide SEBI (Mutual Funds) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2024 w.e.f. December 16, 2024.  

=== PAGE 194 ===
 
194 
 
Chapter 5: Sample Questions 
1. The net asset value of a mutual fund primarily reflects which one of the following? 
a. The expenses of the AMC 
b. The dividends and interest payable to investors 
c. The current market value of the fund’s portfolio 
d. The income of the fund’s constituents 
 
2. An investor wanting to purchase the units of an ETF will transact with _______ and receive 
the units in _______. 
a. Distributors; Account statement 
b. Brokers; demat account 
c. AMC, account statement 
d. Distributor, demat account 
 
3. The KYC requirements for a mutual fund folio have to be completed by _______. 
a. First holder only 
b. All holders, except minors 
c. All holders including minors 
d. First and second holders only 
 
4. Units of a mutual fund can be purchased by investing a pre-determined amount periodically.  
This facility is called ________. 
a. Systematic Investment Plan 
b. Systematic withdrawal plan 
c. Systematic dividend plan 
d. Dividend re-investment plan 
 
5. Mutual fund s are required to disclose their Net Asset Value ( NAV) on daily basis.  State 
whether True or False. 
a. True  
b. False 
 

=== PAGE 195 ===
 
195 
 
CHAPTER 6: DERIVATIVES MARKETS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1  Derivatives 
A derivative refers to a financial product whose value is derived from another. A derivative is 
always created with reference to the other product, also called the underlying. 
A derivative is a risk management tool used commonly in transactions where there is risk due to 
an unknown future value.  For example, a buyer of gold faces the risk that gold prices may not be 
stable. When one needs to  buy gold on a day far into the future, the price may be higher than 
today. The fluctuating price of gold represents risk. If it were pos sible to fix today, the price for a 
transaction on a later date in future, such risks can be managed better.  
A derivative market deals with the financial value of such risky outcomes. A derivative product can 
be structured to enable a pay -off and make good some or all of the losses if gold prices go up as 
feared. Similarly, many other financial assets and physical commodities can be hedged by the use 
of derivatives.  
6.1.1 Managing Risk with Derivatives 
A derivative market is formed when different players with different needs, to manage their risks, 
come together and try to secure themselves from the respective risky events that they fear in the 
future. 
Coming back to the example of gold given above, let's think about the seller. If the buyer is worried 
about buying gold at a higher price when the need arises, the seller is worried about gold prices 
falling in the future. Both of them face the risk of the unknown future price of gold. But one is 
negatively affected by a fall in price; the other is negatively affected by a rise in price. If they both 
are able to get into a contract, in which they agree on the price at which they will sell and buy gold 
on a future date, they have a “forward” contract. The buyer and the seller are then 
"counterparties" to the contract, meaning they represent opposing interests. Such a contract gives 
comfort to both parties but one party's loss will be the other's gain.  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: 
After studying this chapter, you should know about: 
 Definition of derivatives and the concepts underlying derivatives 
 Types of derivative products 
 Trading and Settlement of Derivatives 
 Risk Management in Derivatives 
 Benefits, costs and risk of derivatives 

=== PAGE 196 ===
 
196 
 
Assume that the buyer and the seller agree to exchange 10 grams of gold at a price of Rs.30,000 
one year from now.  This is a forward contract. The price at which gold will be sold and bought has 
been agreed upon today, but the actual exchange will happen sometime forward, a year from 
today hence the name, forward contract. 
A forward is a derivative contract where two parties agree to exchange a specific good at a specific 
price, on a specific date in the future.  A forward contract reduces the risk of an unknown price to 
both the seller and the buyer. If the prices fall, the buyer still pays only the price agreed, but he 
gives up a possible gain if he had not bought the forward contract; the seller on the other hand 
gains when prices falls, since he has sold his gold using a forward, at a better price.  If gold price 
were to rise, the seller would lose and the buyer would gain in a forward contract arrangement.  
Consider these possibilities one year from now: 
A. Price of gold remains unchanged at Rs.30,000. 
Outcome: Neither party loses. They buy and sell at Rs.30,000. 
 
B. The price of gold moves up to Rs.35,000 
Outcome: The buyer gains.   
He pays only Rs.30,000 while the market price is Rs.35,000.   
The seller loses.  
He is able to get only Rs.30,000 while the market price is Rs.35,000. 
 
C. The price of gold falls to Rs.25,000. 
Outcome: The seller gains.  
He is able to get Rs.30,000 while the market price is lower.  
The buyer loses. 
He pays Rs.30,000 while he could have bought  in the market at a lower price of Rs.25,000. 
It is clear that one of the two parties tends to lose, while the other gains. This is because both of 
them did not accurately know what the price of gold would be in the future. Their contract was 
structured to enable them to pay a pre -determined fixed price. Such a contract is called a 
“forward”.  A forward is one of the examples of a derivative contract. 
If one carefully examined the forward contract above, the risk being managed here pertains to the 
price of the gold, measurable in money terms.  Derivative markets are structured to deal with risk 
arising out of changes in value of something else in monetary terms. In our example it is gold. This 
is known as the underlying.  The underlying is subject to risk that is being managed using the 
derivative.  Therefore, the derivative, its price and value, is intricately linked with the underlying. 

=== PAGE 197 ===
 
197 
 
6.1.2 Structuring a Derivative Product 
A derivative product is defined by a set of payoffs, based on a specific set of criteria. For example, 
a forward pays off the difference between the current price and the agreed forward price, 
irrespective of whether the price is high er or lower. Some derivative contracts can be set up to 
payoff only if there is rise in price, or a fall in price, but not both.  There are various innovative 
ways in which derivative payoffs are structured, making derivatives some of the more complex 
financial products. 
The primary objective in a derivative contract is to transfer the risk from one party to another.  
The buyer of gold transfers the risk of a possible rise in prices to the seller; the seller of gold 
transfers the risk of a possible fall in prices to the buyer. Depending on how the risk is defined 
spliced and how many parties are there to the contract, the derivative product can be structured 
differently. 
Consider the following examples: 
a. A farmer faces the risk of crop loss if the monsoon fail. He can enter into a derivative contract 
whose payoff depends on the amount of rainfall. This is a weather derivative. 
b. A borrower faces the risk of paying a floating interest rate that varies with the benchmark rate. 
His business situation needs a steady  and fixed cash outflow. He can enter into a derivative 
contract where he receives a floating rate and pays a fixed rate. This is an interest rate swap. 
c. An Indian importer has to pay in US Dollars for the goods he has ordered in the international 
markets. He is worried about the rupee depreciating in value, which will increase the amount 
of rupees he needs, in order to pay the same amount of dollars when his order is shipped. He 
can enter into a contract that fixes the exchange rate of the rupee to the doll ar on the future 
date when his payment is due. This is a currency derivative. 
d. A portfolio manager faces the risk that the value of his portfolio will fall if the equity markets 
fall in the future. He has to make a few pay-outs to his investors, which will come under risk if 
the value of his portfolio falls. He enters into a contract where he will receive a payoff 
depending on the value of the equity index, if it were to fall. This is an index derivative. 
The underlying is different in each one of the above. The derivative is used to manage risks arising 
out of the changes in the value of the underlying.   
 
6.2 Underlying concepts in Derivatives 
6.2.1 Zero Sum Game in Futures 
In a derivative contract, the counterparties who enter into the contract have opposing views and 
needs.  The seller of gold futures thinks prices will fall, and benefits if the price falls below the price 
at which he entered into the futures contract.  The buyer of gold futures thinks prices will rise, and 

=== PAGE 198 ===
 
198 
 
benefits if the price rises beyond the price at which he has agreed to buy gold in the future.  The 
sum of the two positions is zero. 
In a derivative market, there is a “long” position of a buyer, and the re is a corresponding “short” 
position of a seller.  The willingness of both parties to agree to an exchange at a specific term, on 
a specific date in the future, creates the derivative position.  Therefore , by definition, the net 
economic value of all der ivative positions should be zero.  There is no new asset or n o new 
underlying created because of derivative contracts on the underlying asset. 
6.2.2 Settlement Mechanism 
Earlier most derivative contracts were settled in cash.  Cash settlement is a settleme nt method 
where upon expiration or exercise of the derivatives contract, the counterparties to the contract 
settle their position through exchange of the price differentials and do not deliver the actual 
(physical) underlying asset. 
Since October 2019, SEBI has mandated physical settlement (settlement by delivery of underlying 
stock) for all stock derivatives i.e. all positions in futures and options on individual securities which 
remain open on the expiry date of the contract are to be settled by physical delivery only. 
However, Index futures and Index options contracts continue to be settled in cash. 
6.2.3 OTC and Exchange Traded Derivatives 
Some derivative contracts are settled between counterparties on terms mutually agreed upon 
between them. These are c alled over the counter (OTC) derivatives. They are non -standard and 
they depend on the trust between counterparties to meet their commitment as promised. These 
are prevalent only between institutions, which are comfortable dealing with each other.  
Exchange-traded derivatives are standard derivative contracts defined by an exchange, and are 
usually settled through a clearing corporation.   The buyers and sellers maintain margins with the 
clearing corporation, which enables players that do not know one anoth er (anonymous) to enter 
into contracts on the strength of the settlement process of the clearing corporation.  
Forwards are OTC derivatives; futures are exchange-traded derivatives.   
6.2.4 Arbitrage 
The law of one  price states that two goods that are iden tical, cannot trade at different prices in 
two different markets. It is easy to buy from the cheaper market and sell at the costlier market, 
and make riskless profits.  However, such buying and selling itself will reduce the gap in prices. The 
demand in the cheaper market will increase prices there and the supply into the costlier market 
will reduce prices, bringing the prices in both markets to the same level.  Arbitrageurs are 
specialists who identify such price  differential in two markets and indulge in trades that reduce 
such differences in price. Prices in two markets for the same tradable good will be different only 

=== PAGE 199 ===
 
199 
 
to the extent of transaction costs. These costs can include transportation, storage, insurance, 
interest costs and any other cost that impacts the activities of buying and selling. 
In the derivative market, the underlying asset is the same as it is in the cash market. But the price 
to buy the same asset in the derivative market can be different from that of the cash market due 
to the presenc e of other costs such as physical warehousing or interest costs.  The pricing of 
derivatives includes these costs. 
6.3  Types of Derivative Products 
The four commonly used derivative products are: 
 Forwards 
 Futures 
 Options 
 Swaps 
6.3.1 Forwards 
Forwards are over the counter (OTC) derivatives that enable buying or selling an underlying on a 
future date, at an agreed upon price.  The terms of a forward contract are as agreed between 
counterparties.  
Example: 
A farmer agrees to sell his produce of wheat to a miller, 6 months later when his crop is ready, at 
a price that both counterparties agree today.   
This is a forward contract since it will be completed later (forward).  It is also an OTC contract. It 
can be settled in cash or result in actual delivery of wheat. The settlement terms such as quantity 
and quality of wheat to be delivered, the price and payment terms are as decided by the 
counterparties. A forward contract is a non-standard futures contract.  It carries counterparty risk 
if either one fails to honor their side of the contract.  It is therefore always entered into between 
known parties, and leans on informal protection mechanisms to ensure that the contract is 
honored.  The concentration of commodity futures trading in certain geograph ical locations, or 
between a few communities is to ensure such informal protection against counterparty risks. The 
forward markets in commodities in several parts of India are based on mutual trust and are 
functional despite the risks involved. 
6.3.2 Futures 
Futures are exchange -traded forwards. A future is a contract for buying or selling a specific 
underlying, on a future date, at a price specified today, and entered  into through a formal 
mechanism on an exchange.  The terms of the contract are specified by the exchange.   
Example: 

=== PAGE 200 ===
 
200 
 
Wheat futures traded on the Multi  Commodity Exchange (MCX) of India has the following 
specifications (among others): 
Trading unit: 10MT 
Minimum order size: 500MT 
Maximum position per individual: 5000 MT 
Quality: Standard Mill Quality as specified by the exchange 
Contract begin date: 21st of the month 
Delivery options: Physical delivery only 
Delivery date: 20th of the month 
Delivery centre: Exchange approved warehouses 
Futures are thus forward contracts defined and traded on an exchange. Another important feature 
of an exchange -traded futures contract is the clearing  corporation. The counterparty for each 
transaction is the clearing corporation.  Buyers and sellers are required to maintain margins with 
the clearing corporation, to ensure that they honor their side of the transaction.  The counterparty 
risks in a futures contract are eliminated using the clearing corporation mechanism. 
6.3.3 Options 
An Option is a contract that gives its buyers the right, but not an obligation, to buy or sell the 
underlying asset on or before a stated date/day, at a stated price, for a price. The party taking a 
long position i.e. buying the option is called buyer/ holder of the option and the party taking a 
short position i.e. selling the option is called the seller/ writer of the option. The option buyer has 
the right but no obligation with regards to buying or selling the underlying asset, while the option 
writer has the obligation in the contract. Therefore, op tion buyer/ holder will exercise his option 
only when the situation is favourable to him, but, when he decides to exercise, option writer would 
be legally bound to honour the contract. Options may be categorized into two main types: 
• Call Options 
• Put Options 
Option, which gives buyer a right to buy the underlying asset, is called Call option and the option 
which gives buyer a right to sell the underlying asset, is called Put option. 
Option Terminology 
Arvind buys a call option on the Nifty index from S alim, to buy the Nifty at a value of Rs. 10,000, 
three months from today.  Arvind pays a premium of Rs 100 to Salim. What does this mean? 
 Arvind is the buyer of the call option.   

