

===== PAGE 69 =====

68 
 
 CHAPTER 5: SCHEME RELATED INFORMATION 
5.1 Mandatory Documents 
“Mutual fund investments are subject to market risk. Please read all scheme related 
documents before investing.” These lines are mentioned in all mutual fund related 
communications. So, what are the scheme related documents? 
 
The legal documents that provide the information that the investor requires are available in  
the scheme related documents (Scheme Information Document, Statement of Additional  
Information) and the Key Information Memorandum. 
Scheme related documents c an be used for making an informed investment decision. The  
suitability of a mutual fund scheme to an investor depends upon the features of the scheme 
and matching it to the needs of the investor from the investment. 
Investors need to note that their investments are governed by the principle of caveat emptor 
i.e., let the buyer beware. An investor is presumed to have read and understood the scheme 
related documents before investing in a mutual fund scheme. In fact, since this is a contractual 
arrangement, the person signing the application form has legally accepted the  terms of the 
offer. Therefore, an investor cannot claim at a future date of being unaware of a fact that was 
disclosed in the scheme related documents. 
There are primarily two important documen ts for understanding about the mutual fund  
scheme: 
a) Scheme Information Document (SID), which has details of the particular scheme23 
b) Statement of Additional Information (SAI), which has statutory information about the   
mutual fund or AMC, that is offering the scheme. 
                                                 
23 https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/nov-2023/simplification-and-streamlining-of-offer-documents-of-
mutual-fund-schemes_78665.html 
  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: 
 
After studying this chapter, you should know about: 
 Mandatory Documents 
• Scheme Information Document 
• Statement of Additional Information 
• Key Information Memorandum 
 Non-Mandatory Documents 

===== PAGE 70 =====

69 
 
It stands to reason that a single SAI is relevant for all the schemes offered by a mutual fund.  
In practice, SID and SAI are two separate documents, though the legal technicality is that SAI  
is part of the SID. 
Both documents are prepared in the  format prescribed by SEBI and submitted to SEBI. The  
contents need to flow in the same sequence as in the prescribed format. The mutual fund is  
permitted to add any other disclosure, which it feels, is ‘material’ for the investor. 
Since investors are not sophisticated experts of finance or law, the documents are prepared  
in simple language, and in a clear, concise and easy to understand style. 
While SEBI does not approve or disapprove the Scheme Related Documents, it gives its  
observations. The mutual fund needs to incorporate these observations in these documents.                
Thus, the Documents in the market are “vetted” by SEBI, and not approved by SEBI.24 
Draft SID and SAI are public documents, available for viewing on SEBI’s website 
(www.sebi.gov.in). The final documents (after incorporating SEBI’s observations) have to be  
hosted on AMFI’s website (www.amfiindia.com) two days before the issue opens. Every  
mutual fund, on its website, provides for download of these documents for all its current  
schemes. 
Objective of the scheme related documents 
SID and SAI together are the primary source of information for any investor —existing as well        
as prospective. These are the operating documents that describe the product. 
Since the investor is required to ma ke an informed investment decision, these documents  
serve the purpose of providing the required information in an easy-to-understand language. 
The units of the scheme are offered to the investor through the scheme related documents.  
By signing the application form and making a payment, the investor is accepting the offer, and 
by issuing units against such an acceptance, the mutual fund then completes the contract. Thus, 
the scheme related documents contain information that forms the basis of the contractual 
relationship between the investor and the fund. 
5.1.1 Scheme Information Document 
The Scheme Information Document (SID) sets forth the information about the  scheme that a 
prospective investor ought to know before investing. An SID remains effective   until a 'material 
change' (other than a change in fundamental attributes and within the  purview of the SID) 
occurs and thereafter changes are filed with SEBI and communicated to  the investors or 
publicly notified by advertisements in the newspapers, subject to the applicable Regulations.  
                                                 
24 Candidates are advised to read the circular: https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/dec -2024/upload-of-
draft-scheme-information-documents_90097.html 
 

===== PAGE 71 =====

70 
 
It is essential to read and understand the SID.  
 5.1.2 Statement of Additional Information 
Statement of Additional Information (SAI), has statutory information about the mutual fund  
or AMC that  is offering the scheme. Therefo re, a single SAI is relevant for all the schemes  
offered by a mutual fund. 
 
Content of Statement of Additional Information 
Every mutual fund, on its website, provides for download of its SAI. However, investors have  
a right to ask for a printed copy of the  SAI. Through the AMFI website (www.amfiindia.com),  
investors can access the SAI of all the mutual funds. the features of a mutual fund scheme. 
 
Content of SAI Description of Content 
Constituents of the mutual 
fund 
SAI gives complete details of the constituents of 
the mutual fund --Sponsors, AMC and  Trustee 
Company, of service providers {Custodian, 
Registrar & Transfer Agent, Statutory Auditor, 
Fund Accountant (if outsourced) and Collecting 
Bankers}. 
 
This includes their experience, condensed 
financial information (for schemes launched in 
last 3 financial  years), key personnel, rights and 
obligations and other information the investor 
may require to evaluate the investment. 
How to Apply SAI provides guidance on how to apply. 
Rights of Unit-holders SAI deta ils the rights to beneficial ownership of 
the assets        of the scheme, timelines for servicing 
investor applications and acknowledgements, 
right to receive information and disclosures and to 
exercise the option to exit in the event of changes 
in the scheme, and other rights of investors. 

===== PAGE 72 =====

71 
 
 
 
5.1.3 Key Information Memorandum 
While an investor is expected to read all the scheme related documents, circulation of the  
same along with the application forms is too difficult and costly, especially if the printed forms 
are to be distributed. In order to ensure the investor gets access to sufficient information in  
spite of such a constraint, a Key Information Memorandum (KIM) is manda torily circulated 
along with the application form. 
 
KIM is essentially a summary of the SID and SAI. It contains the key points of these documents   
that are essential for the investor to know to make a decision on the suitability of the  
investment for their needs. It is more easily and widely distributed in the market. As per SEBI 
regulations, every application form is to be accompanied by the KIM. 
 
Some of the key items contained in the KIM are as follows: 
 
 Name of the AMC, mutual fund, Trustee, Fund Manager and scheme 
 Dates of Issue Opening, Issue Closing and Re-opening for Sale and Re-purchase 
 Investment Objective 
 Asset allocation pattern of the scheme 
 The risk profile of the scheme i.e., a snapshot of the risk to the principal invested, the 
suitable investment horizon for investment and the type of securities that the scheme will 
invest in. 
 Plans and Options 
Investment Valuation Norms SAI provides the details of the regulatory 
specifications on how different  securities in the 
portfolio will be valued. The rules for valuation are 
standardized by the regulator, SEBI. 
Tax, Legal & General 
Information 
SAI provides information on legal  aspects of the 
investment that deal with nominations, transfer 
and transmission of units, investment by minors, 
pledge/lien on units and others. Also, this  section 
provides details regarding taxa tion and other  
general information. 
Investor Grievance provides details of how the investor can register 
a grievance. 

===== PAGE 73 =====

72 
 
 Benchmark Index 
 Dividend Policy 
 Performance of scheme and benchmark over last 1 year, 3 years, 5 years and    since  
inception. 
 Expenses of the scheme 
 Information regarding registration of investor grievances 
 
5.1.4 Addendum 
While the SID, SAI and KIM need to be updated periodically, the interim changes are updated  
through the issuance of such addendum. The addendum is considered to be a part of the  
scheme related documents and must accompany the KIM. 
 
5.1.5 Updation of Scheme Documents—Regulatory provisions 
Updation of SID 
For the open ended and interval schemes, the SID shall be updated within next six months  
from the end of the 1 st half or 2nd half of the financial year in which schemes were launched,  
based on the relevant data and information as at the end of previous month.  Subsequently,     
SID shall be updated within one month from the end of the half -year, based on the relevant  
data and information as at the end of September and March respectively. 
The procedure to be followed in case of changes to the open ended and interval scheme shall                 
be as under: 
a. In case of change in fundamental attributes in terms of Regulation 18 (15A) 
 
i.    An addendum to the existing SID shall be issued and displayed on AMC website 
immediately. 
ii.  SID shall be revised and updated immediately after completion of duration of the exit  
option (not less than 30 days from the notice date). 
iii.  A public notice shall be given in respect of such changes in one English daily 
newspaper having nationwide circulation as well as in a newspaper published in the 
language of region where the Head Office of the Mutual Fund is situated.  
b. In case of other changes: 
 
i. The AMC shall be required to issue an addendum and display the same on its website 
immediately. 
ii. The addendum shall be circulated to all the distributors/brokers/Investor Service Centre 
(ISC) so that the same can be attached to all KIM and SID already in stock till it is updated. 

===== PAGE 74 =====

73 
 
iii. Latest applicable addendum shall be a part of KIM and SID. ( e.g. in case of changes in  
load structure the addendum carrying  the latest applicable load structure  shall be 
attached to all KIM and SID already in stock till it is updated). 
iv. Further, the account statements shall continue to include applicable load structure. 
 
Updation of SAI 
 Regular update has to be done by the end of 3 months of every financial year. Material   
changes have to be updated on an ongoing basis and uploaded on the websites of the  mutual 
fund and AMFI. 
Updation of KIM 
 KIM shall be updated at least once in half-year, within one month from the end of the 
respective half-year, based on the relevant data and information as at the end of  September 
and March and shall be filed with SEBI forthwith through electronic mode only. 
 
5.1.6 Other Mandatory information/disclosure 
While the scheme information documents provide mandatory information that help a 
prospective investor to make informed investment decision, the existing investors in a mutual     
fund scheme also need to track the progress of their investments. 
There are two key disclosures that an investor should receive for that purpose, viz., the current 
value of one’s investments, and information about where the scheme has invested. 
The current value of investments is a function of the number of units in an investor’s account 
and the NAV per unit. In order to get the current value of the investments, one has to multiply 
the number of units with the NAV. 
 
This means that an invest or should be able to regularly know the NAV. The unit balance can  
be seen from the latest account statement that one would have got. Chapter 9 has a detailed 
discussion on when and how an investor gets the account statement. 
 
Disclosure of Daily NAV 
Each scheme’s NAV is required to be disclosed at the end of each business day. The same is 
published on the website of the AMC. The Mutual Fund declares the Net Asset Value of the 
scheme on every business day on AMFI’s website www.amfiindia.com (as per the time limit 
Current value of investments = Unit balance in the investor’s account X current NAV 

===== PAGE 75 =====

74 
 
for uploading NAV defined in the applicable guidelines) and also on their website.25 
 
In case of open-ended schemes, the NAV is calculated for all business days and released to the 
Press. In Liquid and Overnight Funds, NAVs are declared on Sundays / holidays as well, which 
reflects the accrual for that day. In case of closed-ended schemes, the NAV is calculated at least 
once a week. 
 
With the availability of historical NAV, an investor should also be able to  calculate how a  
scheme has performed over whatever period one wants to check for. 
 
Disclosure of Total Expense Ratio 
One of the important factors that impact the scheme’s NAV is the Total Expense Ratio (TER),  
charged to the scheme. Though the same is very  tightly regulated through SEBI regulations,  
the investor should know about the scheme expense ratio. SEBI has mandated that the Asset  
Management Companies (AMCs) should prominently disclose on a daily basis, the Total  
expense ratio (scheme-wise, date-wise) of all schemes under a separate head – “Total Expense 
Ratio of Mutual Fund Schemes” on their website. The same must also be published  on the 
AMFI website. The AMCs are also required to send the update to the investors through email 
whenever there is a change in the expense ratio. 
 
Scheme-wise dashboard on mutual fund website 
Each AMC is also required to publish a scheme performance dashboard on the website, and  
update it on a regular basis. The dashboard highlights how various schemes of the mutual fund 
have performed over various holding periods. The scheme performance data is also available 
on the AMFI website.26 
Most AMCs allow this dashboard to be downloaded in a tabular form. This contains the  
following information about the schemes of the mutual fund: 
• Scheme name 
• Scheme classification and category: For example, Equity multi-cap scheme; or Solution- 
oriented scheme–retirement fund 
• Type of scheme: Open-ended or close-ended 
• The investment objective of the scheme 
                                                 
25 In order to enable consideration of all trades during a day for valuation, it has been decided 
to extend the present timeline up to 11.00 p.m. for uploading the NAVs of all schemes (except 
of fund of fund) on the website of AMFI and  respective AMCs. (Vide SEBI Circular dated 
September 24, 2019). 
 
26 https://www.amfiindia.com/research-information/other-data/mf-scheme-performance-details 

===== PAGE 76 =====

75 
 
• Name of the fund manager 
• Benchmark index (including additional benchmark, if any) 
• Exit load and lock-in period (if any) 
• Plans and options: For example, direct and regular plans; Income Distribution cum capital 
withdrawal and growth options, etc. 
• Minimum investment amount 
• Month-end AUM 
• TER 
• Scheme inception date 
• Month-end portfolio 
• Scheme performance 
Such a dashboard allows an investor to make an easy comparison of schemes across the  
mutual fund. 
 
Risk-o-meter 
Mutual Fund/AMCs shall also disclose risk -o-meter of the scheme and benchmark while  
disclosing the performance of scheme vis-à-vis benchmark.27 
 
 
Portfolio disclosure 
This is a list of securities where the corpus of the scheme is currently invested. The market  
value of these investments is also stated in portfolio disclosures. Mutual Funds/ AMC s shall 
disclose portfolio (along with ISIN) as on the last day of the month / half -year for all their 
schemes on their respective website and on the website of AMFI within 10 days from the close 
                                                 
27 https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/nov-2024/disclosure-of-expenses-half-yearly-returns-yield-and-risk-
o-meter-of-schemes-of-mutual-funds_88230.html (November 5, 2024) 


===== PAGE 77 =====

76 
 
of each month/ half -year respectively in a user -friendly and  downloadable   spreadsheet   
format. For   debt   schemes, such disclosure shall be done on fortnightly basis within 5 days 
of every fortnight. In addition to the current portfolio disclosure, yield of the instrument shall 
also be disclosed. 
Financial results 
The mutual fund shall before the expiry of one month from the close of each half year, (Mar 
31 and Sep 30 shall display the unaudited financial results on the AMC website, the 
advertisement in this reference will be published by the fund in at least o ne English daily  
newspaper having nationwide circulation and, in a newspaper, having wide circulation 
published in the language of the region where the head office of the fund is situated. 
Annual reports and related disclosures 
Annual report or abridged su mmary is required to be hosted on AMCs website and on the  
website of AMFI. This is sent by email to the investors who have registered their email id with  
the fund, no later than four months from the date of closure of the relevant financial year i.e., 
March 31 each year. Investors’ who have not registered their email -id have an option of  
receiving a physical copy of the Annual report or an Abridged summary thereof. 
5.2 Non-Mandatory Disclosures 
Fund Factsheet 
One of the most popular documents from the mutual fund is the monthly Fund Factsheet. This    
document is extensively used by investors, fund distributors, fund rating agencies, research  
analysts, media and others to access information about the various schemes of the mutual  
fund. While it is not a regulatory requirement to publish the monthly fact sheet, it is a market                             
practice followed by all the fund houses, on a voluntary basis. Since fund factsheet is a  
marketing and information document, various SEBI regulations pertain ing to information  
disclosure are applicable to it.  
 
The fund factsheet contains the basic information of each scheme such as the inception date, 
corpus size (AUM), current NAV, benchmark and a pictorial depiction of the fund’s style of  
managing the fund.  The fund’s performance relative to the benchmark is provided for the  
different periods along with the benchmark returns, as required by SEBI’s regulations. The  
factsheet also provides the SIP returns in the scheme, portfolio allocation to different sectors 
and securities. However, some fund houses do not disclose the entire portfolio but only the  
top 10 holdings. 
 
In the factsheet, security wise as well as sector wise allocation is provided for equity schemes. 
Some factsheets also disclose the derivatives exposure taken by the mutual fund schemes. In                    
the debt funds, the factsheet discloses the rating profile of the various securities, and a  

===== PAGE 78 =====

77 
 
snapshot of exposure of the scheme to various rating baskets. 
Portfolio features such as the price -earnings ratio (PE), Beta and other risk measures such as                        
standard deviation and Sharpe ratio (in case of equity funds), credit rating profile, average  
maturity and duration (in case of debt funds) are also available in the factsheet. The factsheet 
also provides investment details such as the minimum investment amount, the plans and  
options available in the scheme, the loads and expenses and systematic transaction facilities  
available in the fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 79 =====

78 
 
Chapter 5: Sample Questions 
1. “Please read the scheme related documents carefully” – which documents does 
this line refer to? 
a. Scheme Information Document and audited balance sheet of the Asset 
Management Company 
b. Trust deed and Key Information Memorandum  
c. Statement of Additional Information and fund fact sheet 
d. Scheme Information Document and Statement of Additional Information  
 
2. Which of the following statements is ‘TRUE’ with respect to the Scheme 
Information Document (SID) and Statement of Additional Information (SAI)? 
a. These two documents are prepared in the format prescribed by Association 
of Mutual Funds in India as part of AMFI’s Code of Conduct 
b. These two documents are prepared in the format prescribed by Association 
of Mutual Funds in India as part of AMFI’s Best Practices Circular 
c. These two documents are prepared in the format prescribed by Securities 
and Exchange Board of India  
d. Each Asset Management Company is free to prepare these documents in 
the format they desire 
 
3. What is the purpose of the mutual fund Risk-o-meter? 
a.   To display fund expenses 
b.   To show past returns of the fund 
c.   To depict the risk level associated with the mutual fund scheme 
d.   To show portfolio holdings 
 
4.  How often must mutual funds disclose their portfolio holdings on their website? 
a.   Annually 
b.  Quarterly 
c.   Monthly or half-yearly (fortnightly for debt schemes) 
d.  Weekly 
 
5. Which body prescribes the format of SID and SAI? 
      a.   Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
      b.   Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
      c.   Ministry of Finance 
      d.   Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI) 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 80 =====

79 
 
6. The Scheme Information Document (SID) contains: 
     a.   Statutory details of the mutual fund and AMC 
     b.   Key details of a particular mutual fund scheme 
     c.   Only taxation and legal aspects of investments 
     d.   Information about investor grievances only 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 81 =====

80 
 
CHAPTER 6: FUND DISTRIBUTION AND CHANNEL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
6.1 The role and importance of mutual fund distributors 
An investor needs to invest the money in a portfolio of various investment options to achieve 
financial goals. This process of building a portfolio could be achieved with the help of the  
selection of  a basket of mutual fund schemes. However, one may still need help in 
constructing a p ortfolio with the help of an expert. This expert could be a mutual fund  
distributor. 
 
 
In Chart 6.1, two professionals have been shown between the investor and her investment  
portfolio, viz., a mutual fund distributor, and a fund manager. This fund manage r could be a 
mutual fund manager managing a mutual fund portfolio in line with the scheme’s investment                        
objectives, as discussed earlier. 
 
The fund manager analyses various inputs and data points including the company specific or   
industry specific information, and economy wide factors. The analysis may include about  
liquidity aspects in the market, and the mood of the market participants. After such a detailed 
analysis, the fund manager constructs a portfolio of securities in line with the stated objective 
Learning Objectives: 
 
After studying this chapter, you should know about: 
 
 Role and importance of mutual fund distributors 
 Different kinds of mutual fund distributors 
 Modes of distribution 
 Pre-requisites to become a mutual fund distributor 
 Revenue of a mutual fund distributor 
 Commission disclosure mandated by SEBI 
 Due Diligence Process by AMCs for Distributors of Mutual Funds 
 Nomination facilities for mutual fund distributors 
 Change of distributors 
Chart 6.1: Mutual Fund Investors, professionals and portfolio 
Investor
r 
Mutual 
fund 
distributor 
Fund 
manager 
Portfolio 

===== PAGE 82 =====

81 
 
of  the mutual fund scheme. 
 
On the other hand, the mutual fund distributor’s job is to assess the needs, limitations,  
resources and financial goals of the investor. This analysis would help the mutual fund  
distributor arrive at a su itable asset allocation plan for the investor. Armed with this, the  
distributor then goes on to identify mutual fund schemes, which are appropriate for the  
investor in the given situation. 
 
Look at this in another way, the mutual fund distributor analyses the situation of the investor; 
whereas the fund manager analyses the market factors. Both the professionals play important  
roles in helping the investor achieve one’s financial goals. 
 
With that background look at various categories of mutual fund distributors. 
6.2 Different kinds of mutual fund distributors 
Mutual funds are distributed in India to the investors through multiple channels, viz., 
individual mutual fund distributors, bank branches, national distributors through their 
branches or their sub -agents, post offices, and directly by the AMCs. While the category of  
distributors is also varied, the platforms used are also many. Funds may be distributed through 
the traditional method of using paper-based application forms, or through electronic platforms 
such as websites, mobile phones and stock exchanges. 
 
Let us first look at the different categories and their characteristics. 
 
6.2.1 Individual players 
India has a long history of distribution of financial products through individuals. Both Life  
Insurance Corporation of India Ltd (LIC), and Unit Trust of India (UTI) depended on a huge  
force of individual agents. While the two institutions made various products and solutions  
available, the agency force (i.e., individual agents) ensured these products  reached the 
households. These same agents also distributed the small savings products, and to that extent, 
they played a huge role in bringing household savings into financial products. 
 
Almost all of them operated as individuals, and single-handedly, without any staff or skeleton 
staff, mainly to handle the paperwork. Even today, this is a very large part of the distribution 
link between the asset management companies and the investors. Quite a few new mutual  
fund distributors start their business this way – single-handedly, as individuals. 
 
Later, some of them expand and grow into larger entities. While the former is known as the  
“individual” channel, the rest can be called the “non-individual” channel. 
The traditional non -institutional channels operate throug h different business models. These  

===== PAGE 83 =====

82 
 
could be as under: 
 
 Through their own branch offices and employees 
 Through a network of sub-agents 
 
6.2.2 Non-individual entities 
Non-individual entities include partnerships, regional distributors, national distributors, 
NBFCs, banks, stockbrokers, etc. Out of these, the distribution companies and banks are  
sometimes referred as institutional distributors. 
 
In both cases, the investor is serviced by an individual—be it an employee of the firm or a sub- 
agent. However, the difference lies in the operations of the firm and its cost structure —the 
former incurs fixed expenses of running the large operations, whereas the latter have highe r  
variable costs. The employees earn through salary, whereas the sub-agents earn a 
commission, which is linked to the business generated. 
 
Within the non-individual distributors, there are different business models. 
 
Banks 
Banks have emerged as a prominent channel for the distribution of mutual fund products to 
their account holders. Within the banking structure, the multinational banks were the first to 
enter the business of mutual fund distribution. The private sector banks and the public-sector  
banks entered the business much later. Nowadays, even some cooperative banks are also  
distributing mutual funds. Banks employ different business units catering to different client  
segments, viz., retail banking and wealth management or priority banking or private banking. 
The categorization is based on the wealth of the clients or the surplus available for investment 
in financial assets. 
 
Mutual funds have built relationships with PSU banks that have a wide reach in non -urban 
centres to distribute mutual fund products through them. Also, private and foreign banks  
actively participate in the distribution process of mutual fund products. 
 
Many others like stock brokers and NBFC also use a similar classification between retail clients 
and wealthy clients. While some NBFCs and stock brokers  reach out to service their clients  
through their own employees, some  have empaneled sub -agents. One may also call it an  
agency channel. These sub -agents are not employees of the firm but purely work as an  
extended distribution arm. 
 

===== PAGE 84 =====

83 
 
While the banks and NBFCs may operate at a national level, there could be some other firms  
that only distribute financial products. Some of these firms may have a national presence, while                       
some others may operate within a region. These are often referred as national distributor or 
regional distributors in the mutual fund industry. 
 
Some new players have entered the fray of late. These are the e-commerce platforms and few 
other online distributors that also distribute mutual fund schemes. These players operate    
through the internet without having a physical office for the clients to visit. SEBI Circular dated 
13 June 2023 provides the guidelines for Execution Only Platforms, relevant for digital / online 
platforms. 
6.3 Modes of distribution 
Traditionally, not just mutual funds, but all financial products were distributed thro ugh the 
use of application forms printed on paper. This process involved carrying physical forms to the 
client’s place and then depositing those forms at the respective official points of acceptance 
(OPOAs). With the advent of the internet and mobile phones, the distribution channel shifted 
to digital mode. Of late, the balance is shifting towards digital transactions,  though the 
physical paper-based transactions continue in a significant way. 
 
Many distributors and their investors still prefer the paper mo de, whereas the new age  
Internet-based businesses, viz. e-commerce platforms, and online distributors operate 
entirely through the digital mode. 
 
On the other hand, there are a few that employ a hybrid mode, where some transactions take 
place digitally, some others happen physically. 
 
The different models of online distribution are discussed below. 
 
6.3.1 Online Channel Partners 
The advent of the internet has changed the way business is conducted in many industries, and                           
mutual fund distribution is no different. The distributors are able to expand their business  
beyond geographical boundaries. Investors, also prefer to transact through the internet, rather 
than the cumbersome paperwork and dependence on the distributor. A few distributors offer 
transaction support through their own websites. 
 
6.3.2 Stock Exchange Platforms 
SEBI has facilitated buying and selling of the units of open -ended mutual funds through the  
stock exchanges. Exchanges have developed mutual fund transaction engines for this purpose. 

===== PAGE 85 =====

84 
 
The low cost and deeper reach of the stock exchange network enable an increased level of  
participation of retail investors in mutual funds. AMCs are required to list the units of close - 
ended and interval schemes on a stock exchange and the units of ETFs are also bought and sold 
in the stock exchange. 
Both National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) have extended their  
trading platforms to help the stock exchange brokers become a channel for investors to 
transact in Mutual Fund units. NSE’s platform is called NMF II Platform. BSE’s platform is the  
BSE StAR Mutual Funds Platform. 
 
6.3.3 Aggregating platforms 
MF Utilities (MFU) is a transaction aggregating platform that connects investors, RTAs, 
distributors, banks, AMCs a nd others. MFU facilitates the distributors with online access to  
submit investor transactions. This  platform provides them with a single point for time - 
stamping of transactions, document submission, paperless transaction facility, and login  
facility for their clients. 
 
Investors who register on the MFU are allotted a Common Account Number (CAN) under  
which all their mutual fund holdings are consolidated. Investors have to be KYC compliant to 
register for a CAN. If an investor is not already KYC compliant, then the MFU will facilitate KYC 
registration along with the allotment of ‘CAN’. 
 
The MFU offers a Common Transaction Form to transact in multiple schemes across 
participating mutual funds using a single form. The form can be submitted through a mutual   
fund distributor or to neutral Points of Service (PoS) and others irrespective of the RTA  
servicing the mutual fund. MFU offers multiple modes of payments for investment through  
physical and electronic means. MFU allows a single payment for multiple subscriptions made 
under a single form. The existing mutual fund holding is mapped to the CAN based on PAN,  
holding pattern and other parameters. Investors may have multiple CANs based on the  
combination of holdings and mode of holding.  Investors can also request  online access  
through which they can submit transactions, view holdings and lodge and track complaints.  
The bank and nomination details provided to the MFU at the time of registering for the CAN  
will override the information provided in the folios. 
Now another similar platform called MF Central has been launched, promoted by KFintech 
and CAMS. 
6.3.4 Computer-based and Mobile-based Apps offered by distributors 
Apart from the above platforms and the websites of distributors, the transaction facilities are 
now available on mobile devices –smartphones, feature phones, and tablet computers. This  
makes it even more convenient than going to a website. These are through apps that are  

===== PAGE 86 =====

85 
 
created by distributors in order to facilitate investments for their clients. Thes e multiple  
channels make it easier for clients to transact in a simple manner. 
6.3.5 Electronic platforms created by the AMCs 
Apart from the above, various AMCs have also created their own facilities like web-based and 
mobile-based applications that facilitate various transactions. Many AMCs also offer 
transaction facilities through SMS and WhatsApp. When an investor uses these platforms then 
they are dealing directly with the mutual fund. 
 
6.3.6 New age investment platforms 
The Indian investors have also s een the emergence of new -age investment platforms. These 
are technology -based platforms that allow investors to invest in mutual funds apart from  
other areas like stocks, bonds etc. One of the key features of these platforms is the simplicity 
of investment without the hassle of too much paperwork plus its low cost. On many of these  
platforms, investors can buy direct plans of mutual funds too. These are available both  
through websites as well as apps so it also becomes simple to interact with. Examples of these 
include Groww, Kuvera, Paytm money, Coin etc. 
6.4 Pre-requisites to become Distributor of a Mutual Fund 
An Asset Management Company  may appoint an individual, bank, non -banking finance 
company or distribution company as a distributor. SEBI has mandated mutual fund 
distributors, agents or any persons employed or to be employed in the sale and/or distribution 
of mutual fund products, to have a valid certification from the National Institute  of Securities 
Markets (NISM) by passing NISM Series-V-A: Mutual Fund Distributors Certification 
Examination. 
In order to be eligible to sell or market mutual funds, the following are compulsory: 
 Obtaining NISM Certification 
− The individual needs to pass the NISM certification examination mandated by SEBI. 
 
− For perso ns who have attained the age of 50 years or who have at least 10 years of  
experience in the securities markets in the sale and/ or distribution of mutual fund  products 
as of May 31, 2010, can obtain the certification either by passing the NISM  certification 
examination or qualifying for Continuing Professional Education (CPE) by obtaining such 
classroom credits as may be specified by NISM from time to time.28 
                                                 
28  SEBI Gazette Notification Ref. No. LAD-NRO/GN/2010-11/09/6422 
http://www.nism.ac.in/nism18042016/index.php/circulars/173-sebi-notification-on-nism-series-v-a-mutual- fund-     
distributors-dated-may-31-2010 

===== PAGE 87 =====

86 
 
 Know Your Distributor Requirements 
As part of SEBI’s drive to streamline the distribution process of  mutual fund products, AMFI  
has introduced the KYD process to verify the correctness of the information provided in the  
registration documents and to have verification of the ARN holders.29 
 
The process consists of document verification and a bio-metric process. 
 Self-attested copy of the PAN card and specific documents as proof of address to be  
submitted along with application form at the CAMS-PoS (Computer Age Management 
Services-Points of Service). The original documents have to be presented for 
verification. 
 The bio-metric process consists of taking the impression of the index finger of the right 
hand of the ARN holder. This is done at the PoS at the time of submission of documents 
(both for new registrations and renewal of ARN). In case of non-individual distributors, 
the bio-metric process will be conducted on specified authorized persons. 
 An acknowledgement confirming the completion of KYD process is received from the  
CAMS-PoS. 
 The existing ARN holders have to send the photocopy of the acknowledgement to  all 
the AMCs with whom they are empaneled. 
 
 Obtaining AMFI Registration Number 
After obtaining the certification and completing KYD requirements, the next stage is to register 
with AMFI. On registration, AMFI allots an AMFI Registration Number (ARN). Individuals from 
the exempted category (i.e., who have attained the age of 50 years or  have at least 10 years 
of experience as of May 31, 2010) can obtain the ARN without  passing the certifying 
examination, provided they have attended the prescribed CPE  program. Minimum age for 
obtaining ARN is 18 years. 
 Empanelment with AMCs 
Armed with the ARN No., the distributor/stock exchange broker can get empaneled with  any 
number of AMCs. Alternatively, they can become agents of a distributor who is  already 
empaneled wi th AMCs.  Empanelment with the AMC or enrolment as an agent  of an 
empaneled distributor is compulsory to be able to sell mutual fund schemes and  earn the 
commissions. 
Institutions that are into the distribution of mutual funds need to register with AMFI. The 
employees of these institutions need to clear the NISM Series V-A: Mutual Fund Distributors 
Certification Examination and obtain an Employee Unique Identification Number (EUIN) from 
                                                 
29 The new cadre of distributors are not required to comply with KYD/ bio-metrics requirements. However, 
they are 

===== PAGE 88 =====

87 
 
AMFI. The Intermediaries have to ensure that the employees quote the EUIN in the Application 
Form for their client’s investments. There is no separate ARN required for these employees 
since they operate under the ARN of the institution that  they are  working for required to 
submit self-attested copies of identity proof (photo PAN card of individual applicants/ in case 
of Proprietary concern, PAN card of the Proprietary Concern (if available) or Photo PAN Card 
of the Proprietor) and address proof, as mentioned in KYD application form. 
6.3.1 Procedure for getting empanelled as a mutual fund distributor with AMC 
Empanellment with an AMC is a simple process. There is a Request for Empanellment Form to  
be filled in. This provides for basic details, such as: 
 
 Personal information of applicant–Name of person, Age, Trade Name, Contact 
Information, ARN, PAN, Income tax category (such as Resident Individual, Company, Non-
Resident Indian, Foreign Company). 
 Names and contact information of key people handling sales and operations. 
 Business details, such as office area, number of branches, nu mber of employees,  
geographical area covered, years of experience, number of investors, number of agents, 
fund houses already empanelled in, size of AUM etc. 
 
 Bank details and preferences regarding Direct Credit of brokerage in the bank account. 
 Preferences regarding receiving information from the AMC. 
 Nominee 
 The applicant also needs to sign a declaration, which provides for the following: 
o Correctness and completeness of information provided 
o Commitment to keep all the transactional information confidential 
o Commitment to abide by instructions given, as also statutory codes, guidelines   and 
circulars 
 
o Not to issue advertisement or publicity material other than that provided by the AMC 
or pre-approved by the AMC 
 
o Ensure that the risk factors are mentioned along with performance and other related 
information 
o Provide all the information and documents that the AMC may ask for from time to 
time 
 

===== PAGE 89 =====

88 
 
o Ensure that all employees who are engaged in selling or marketing of mutual funds 
have an EUIN. 
 
o Undertake not to rebate commission back to investors, or attract investors through 
the temptation of rebate/gifts, pass back of commission etc. 
o Power to the AMC to terminate the empanelment at any time 
o Some AMCs directly empanel only distributors who are likely to generate adequate 
business – and request others to work under one or the other empanelled distributors. 
o At times, AMCs link the levels of commission to the volumes generated. In such  cases, 
an agent might find it beneficial to work under an established distributor. 
 
While many of the above clauses would be included in the application forms, there is no  
standard format, and each asset management company use their own format for collecting  
such details, as well as for empanelment of distributors. 
 
6.5 Revenue for a mutual fund distributor 
 
The mutual fund distributor earns revenue in the form of commission income for the 
distribution of the mutual fund products/schemes in the manner specified by SEBI from time 
to time. SEBI has recently withdrawn the benefits of upfront com mission and transaction 
charges for the MFDs 30.  
  
Further, AMFI has described the commission structure for MFDs which is as follows: 
  
Mutual fund distributors receive commission on the investments mobilised by them under 
Regular Plan of MF schemes from t he AMCs with whom they are empaneled. The trail 
commission is typically paid on monthly basis as per the commission structure decided by the 
respective AMCs as per their business policy. 
  
As per SEBI MF Regulations, AMCs shall adopt full trail model of co mmission in all schemes, 
without payment of any upfront commission or upfronting of any trail commission, directly or 
indirectly, in cash or kind, through sponsorships, or any other route. 
  
In other words, incentives in any other form to the distributor which is not in the form of trail 
commission is not permitted as per above regulatory guideline. In short, MFDs are paid only 
trail commission and, such trail commission can be paid only in monetary terms. 
 
In order to discourage mis-selling by mutual fund distributors, under Regulation 52(4A), SEBI 
has introduced a provision ‘‘the asset management company shall pay charges or commission 
or fees related to distribution of mutual fund schemes, and in the manner as may be specified 
by SEBI from time to time”.  
                                                 
30 https://www.amfiindia.com/distributor-corner/importantinformation_distributors 

===== PAGE 90 =====

89 
 
SEBI has introduced a revised framework for paying additional commission to mutual fund 
distributors for mobilising investments from new investors. It aims to promote investor 
inclusion, especially among smaller towns and women investors. 31 
 
Further, in case of switch transaction to NFO of a regular plan of mutual fund scheme from an 
existing scheme managed by the same AMC, the AMC shall ensure that the distribution 
commission paid is lower of the commissions offered under the two schemes of switch 
transaction.32 
 
6.5.1 Concept of Trail Commission 
Trail commission is calculated as a percentage of the net assets attributable to the Units sold 
by the distributor. The commission payable is calculated on the daily balances and paid out  
periodically to the distributor as per the agreement entered into with AMC. 
The trail commission is normally paid by the AMC on a quarterly basis or monthly basis. Since 
it is calculated on net assets, distributors benefit from increase in net assets arising out of  
valuation gains in the market. 
 
For example, suppose an investor has bought 1000 units at Rs. 10 each. The distributor who 
procured the investment may have been paid an initial commission calculated as a percentage 
on 1000 units X Rs. 10 i.e., Rs 10,000. 
Later, suppose the NAV of the scheme goes up to Rs.15. Trail commission is payable on 1000 
units * Rs 15 i.e., Rs 15,000 – not the Rs 10,000 mobilised. In short, trail commission depends 
on the NAV. 
Further, unlike products like insurance, where agent commission is paid for a limited number 
of years, a mutual fund distributor is paid trail commission for as long as the investor’s money 
is held in the fund. 
Such indexing of agent commissions to the current value of the investment, and the absence 
of a time limitation to earning it, are unique benefits that make it attractive for distributors to 
sell mutual funds. 
Let us take an example here. A distributor mobilised a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs on a particular day 
when the scheme’s NAV was Rs. 10.0000. The total units allotted were 1,00,000. 
                                                 
31Candidates are advised to read regulation 52(4A) and SEBI Circular dated November 27, 2025 regarding the additional 
incentives to distributors for onboarding new individual investors from B-30 cities and women investors: 
https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/nov-2025/additional-incentives-to-distributors-for-onboarding-new-individual-
investors-from-b-30-cities-and-women-investors_98007.html 
32 SEBI circular no. SEBI/HO/IMD/IMD-PoD-1/P/CIR/2025/23 

===== PAGE 91 =====

90 
 
In this case (Rs. 10,00,000 / Rs. 10.0000). We have assumed a trail commission rate of 1% p.a. 
in this case. Given below is the table showing calculation of trail commission for the month of 
July 2019. (All NAVs are randomly generated, and not of any actual scheme).33 
                                                 
33 This is taken only for the purpose of the calculation and in no way is any indication of the trail commission payable. 
 
 
 
Date 
 
NAV (A) 
 
Value (B) 
Trail 
commission 
(B*1%/365) 
01-Aug-19 10.0000 10,00,000.00 27.40 
02-Aug-19 10.0270 10,02,698.66 27.47 
03-Aug-19 10.0270 10,02,698.66 27.47 
04-Aug-19 10.0270 10,02,698.66 27.47 
05-Aug-19 9.9140  9,91,396.69 27.16 
06-Aug-19 9.9888  9,98,879.74 27.37 
07-Aug-19 9.9114  9,91,144.38 27.15 
08-Aug-19 10.0835 10,08,348.30 27.63 
09-Aug-19 10.1522 10,15,224.62 27.81 
10-Aug-19 10.1522 10,15,224.62 27.81 
11-Aug-19 10.1522 10,15,224.62 27.81 
12-Aug-19 10.1522 10,15,224.62 27.81 
13-Aug-19 9.9837  9,98,374.86 27.35 
14-Aug-19 10.0792 10,07,920.67 27.61 
15-Aug-19 10.0792 10,07,920.67 27.61 
16-Aug-19 10.0897 10,08,968.80 27.64 
17-Aug-19 10.0897 10,08,968.80 27.64 
18-Aug-19 10.0897 10,08,968.80 27.64 
19-Aug-19 10.1038 10,10,377.83 27.68 
20-Aug-19 10.0837 10,08,365.86 27.63 
21-Aug-19 10.0114 10,01,135.92 27.43 
22-Aug-19 9.8527 9,85,267.02 26.99 
23-Aug-19 9.9143 9,91,432.35 27.16 
24-Aug-19 9.9143 9,91,432.35 27.16 
25-Aug-19 9.9143 9,91,432.35 27.16 
26-Aug-19 10.1285 10,12,853.10 27.75 

===== PAGE 92 =====

91 
 
 
No. of units allotted = 1,00,000 at NAV of Rs. 10.0000 
 
Trail Commission is 1 percent of Value i.e., Rs.10,00,000 and subsequently as the NAV changes, 
the value changes. 
 
Table 6.1 Calculation of trail commission for distributors 
In the above example, the trail commission is calculated for each day using the below 
formula: 
 
Since the trail commission rate is mentioned as percent per annum, the same needs to be 
divided by 365 to arrive at the daily trail commission amount. 
 
Smart distributors have accumulated a portfolio of loyal investors to whom they offer superior 
service. The trail commission on these investments ensures a steadily rising income  for the 
distributor. Additional investments from the same investors, and other investors referred by 
the current investors, help them grow the portfolio. 
 
A point to note is that the commission is payable to the distributors to mobilize money from 
their clients. Hence, no commission is payable to the distributor for their own investments  
(self-business). 
 
Regulations require distributors to disclose to their investors all commissions in the form of  
trail commissions or any other form payable to them from similar competing schemes of a  
different mutual fund from amongst which the particular scheme was recommended to the 
investor. 
27-Aug-19 10.1683 10,16,828.15 27.86 
28-Aug-19 10.1171 10,11,710.96 27.72 
29-Aug-19 10.0137 10,01,367.16 27.43 
30-Aug-19 10.0849 10,08,494.98 27.63 
31-Aug-19 10.0849 10,08,494.98 27.63 
Total trail commission for the period: 853.13 
Trail commission for the day = AUM X trail commission rate p.a./365 

===== PAGE 93 =====

92 
 
6.5.2 Additional commission for promoting mutual funds 34 
With a view to promoting mutual funds SEBI has allowed mutual funds to  charge 
additional expenses, which can be used for distribution related expenses,including  
distributor commission35. For example, distributors mobilising funds from investors  
located in B -30 locations (cities and towns beyond the top 30 locations) would earn 
higher commission for promoting mutual funds. We will cover the details of additional 
expenses later in Chapter 7.  
6.5.3 Transaction Charges36 
SEBI earlier permitted mutual fund distributors to receive transaction charges for 
subscriptions of ₹10,000 and above, deducted from the investor’s investment amount. 
However, as per SEBI's circular issued in 2025, this transaction charges framework has been 
withdrawn. There by removing the following: 
 The investor-borne transaction charges, 
 The requirement for investors to pay upfront commissions to distributors. 
Distributors will be compensated directly by Asset Management Companies (AMCs) , in line 
with SEBI’s view that distributors act as agents of AMCs. No charges will be deducted from 
investor contributions. 
6.5.4 Applicability of GST on distributors commission 
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) was implemented in July 2017 and is applicable to 
individuals supplying goods or services with an annual turnover exceeding Rs. 20 lakhs. 
Typically, the supplier pays GST, but for certain goods/services, the recipient must pay under 
the reverse charge mechanism.  
For mutual fund distributors registered with GST, the y must raise an invoice for their 
commission and pay GST. However, under Section 9(4) of the CGST Act and Section 5(4) of 
the IGST Act, recipients are liable to pay GST on purchases from unregistered suppliers 
                                                 
34 Candidates are advised to read regulation 52(4A) and SEBI Circular dated November 27, 2025 
regarding the additional incentives to distributors for onboarding new individual investors from 
B-30 cities and women investors: https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/nov-2025/additional-
incentives-to-distributors-for-onboarding-new-individual-investors-from-b-30-cities-and-
women-investors_98007.html 
 
35 As per the prevailing regulatory guidelines, distributors are eligible only for Trail commission, the upfront  
commission or transaction charges have been discontinued: https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/aug-
2025/transaction-charges-paid-to-mutual-fund-distributors_95950.html 
36 https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/aug-2025/transaction-charges-paid-to-mutual-fund-
distributors_95950.html 
 

===== PAGE 94 =====

93 
 
through the reverse charge. Hence, Asset Management Companies (AMCs) or mutual funds 
must pay GST under reverse charge on commissions to unregistered distributors. 
6.6 Commission Disclosure mandated by SEBI 
 
SEBI has mandated Mutual Funds/AMCs to disclose on their respective websites the total  
commission and expenses paid to distributors who satisfy one or more of the following  
conditions with respect to non-institutional (retail and HNI) investors: 
i. Multiple points of presence (More than 20 locations) 
ii. AUM raised over Rs. 100 crores across the  industry in the non-institutional category 
but including high net worth individuals (HNIs). 
iii. The commission received of over Rs. 1 crore p.a. across industry 
iv. The commission received of over Rs. 50 lakhs from a single Mutual Fund/AMC. 
 
Mutual Funds/AMCs shall also su bmit the above data to AMFI. AMFI  shall disclose the  
consolidated data in this regard on its website. 
In addition to the total commission and expenses paid to distributors, mutual funds / AMCs  
need to make  additional disclosures regarding distributor-wise gross inflows (indicating 
whether the distributor is an associate or group company of the sponsor(s) of the mutual  
fund), net inflows, average assets under management and ratio of AUM to gross inflows on  
their respective website on a yearly basis. 
In case the data indicates that a distributor has an excessive portfolio turnover ratio, i.e., more  
than two times the industry average, AMCs conduct an additional due diligence of such  
distributors. Mutual  Funds/ AMCs are required  to submit the above data to  AMFI and  
consolidated data with respect to the same will be disclosed on the AMFI website. 
6.7 Due Diligence Process by AMCs for Distributors of Mutual Funds 37 
SEBI has mandated AMCs to put in place a due diligence process to regulate distributors who 
qualify any one of the following criteria: 
a. Multiple point presence (More than 20 locations) 
b. AUM raised over Rs. 100 crores across the industry in the non-institutional category 
but including high net worth individuals (HNIs) 
c. The commission received of over Rs. 1 Crore p.a. across industry 
d. The commission received of over Rs. 50 Lakhs from a single mutual fund 
6.8 Difference between distributors and Investment Advisors 
An investment advisor means any person, who for consideration, is engaged in the business 
of providing investment advice to clients or other persons or group of persons and includes  
                                                 
37 Candidates are advised to Refer SEBI Circular No. CIR/IMD/DF/13/2011 dated August 22, 2011 for more details. 

===== PAGE 95 =====

94 
 
any person who holds out himself as an investment adviser, by whatever name called; It  
excludes any distributor of mutual funds who is registered with an association of asse t 
management companies of mutual funds, providing any investment advice to its clients  
incidental to its primary activity. 
This definition makes it clear that any person who holds out as an investment advisor would 
be covered. So, a distributor cannot call  themselves an investment advisor. Further, an 
investment advisor cannot earn both from advisory  as well as distribution commission so this 
needs to be known as both the activities need to be                         separated. 
 
6.8.1 Advisory 
This refers to a service where a distributor represents to offer advice while distributing the  
product, it will be subject to the principle of ‘appropriateness’ of products to that customer  
category. Appropriateness is defined as selling only that product that is iden tified as best  
suited for investors within a defined upper ceiling of risk appetite. No exception shall be  
made. (See Box 6.8.3: Do mutual funds advise15 their clients?) 
 
6.8.2 Execution only 
a. In case of transactions that are not booked as ‘advisory’, it shall still require: 
i. If the distributor has information to believe that the transaction is not appropriate for the 
customer, a written communication be made to the investor regarding the unsuitability of the 
product. The communication shall have to be duly acknowledged and accepted by investor. 
ii. A customer confirmation to the effect that the transaction is ‘execution only’  
notwithstanding the advice of inappropriateness from that distributor be obtained prior to 
the execution of the transaction. 
iii. That on all su ch ‘execution only’ transactions, the customer is not required to  pay 
the distributor anything other than the standard flat transaction charges.38 
 
b. There shall be no third categorization of customer relationship / transaction. 
c. While selling mutual fund products of the distributors’ group/associates, the distributor 
shall make disclosure to the customer regarding the conflict of interest  arising from the  
distributor selling such products. 
 
Compliance and risk management functions of the distributor shall include a review of    
defined management processes for: 
 
i. The criteria to be used in review of products and the periodicity of such review. 
ii. The factors to be included in determining the risk appetite of the customer and the 
                                                 
38As per the prevailing regulatory guidelines, distributors are eligible only for Trail commission, the upfront  
commission or transaction charges have been discontinued: https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/aug-
2025/transaction-charges-paid-to-mutual-fund-distributors_95950.html  

===== PAGE 96 =====

95 
 
investment categorization and periodicity of such review. 
 
Other kinds of due diligence performed are: 
 
i. Review of transactions, exceptions identification, escalation and resolution process by 
internal audit. 
ii. Recruitment, training, certification and performance review of all personnel engaged in 
this business. 
iii. Customer on-boarding and relationship management process, servicing  standards, 
enquiry / grievance handling mechanism. 
iv. Internal/external audit processes, their comments/observations as it relates to MF 
distribution business. 
v. Findings of ongoing review from a sample survey of investors. 
Mutual funds/AMCs may implement additional measures as deemed appropriate to help  
achieve greater investor protection. At this stage, it is important to note here that the advice 
offered by mutual fund dis tributors is incidental to the business of fund distribution, and  
hence the distributors cannot project themselves as investment advisors or financial planners. 
Please refer to the AMFI guidance on MFD nomenclature dated October 20, 2020. 
 
Box. 6.8.3 Do mutual fund distributors advise their clients 
SEBI Investor Adviser Regulations, 2013 exempt distributors of mutual funds from  registration 
as investment advisers, so long as the distributor is providing any investment advice to one’s 
clients incidental to the primary activity of distribution of funds. 
 
At the same time, the due diligence process mentioned above also defines  the customer 
relationships or transactions only in two ways, viz. advisory, or execution  only. In both cases, 
however, the common thing  for the mutual fund distributor is to  see whether the product is 
suitable for the client or not. No third categorization of  customer relationships or transactions 
is allowed. The distributor must perform an analysis of suitability. 
 
Ensuring suitability is also a part of the SEBI (Prohibition of Fraudulent and Unfair Trade Practices 
relating to securities market) 2003. This amendment to the regulation included mis selling in 
units of a mutual fund scheme  within the ambit of the mis -selling regulation. The regulation 
defines mis-selling in units of mutual fund schemes as any of the below: 
 
1. Making a false or misleading statement, or 
2. Concealing or omitting material facts of the scheme, or 
3. Concealing the associated risk factors of the scheme, or 
4. Not taking reasonable care to ensure the suitability of the scheme to the buyer. 
A look at the above provisions would help one understand the role of a mutual fund  
distributor. If a mutual fund distributor does not take care of the above, one would be 
considered to be involved in mis- selling activities. 

===== PAGE 97 =====

96 
 
6.9 Nomination facilities to Agents/Distributors and Payment of Commission to 
Nominee39 
 
The livelihood of a large number of mutual fund distributors (self -employed individuals)  
depends on the commission income primarily the trail commission. The mutual fund 
distributor builds his long-term source of income by bringing-in business. In case of the death  
of a mutual fund distributor (MFD), there would be a loss of income for his/her family.  
Therefore, to provide protection against loss of income to the mutual fund distributor’s family, 
AMFI has advised its  members (AMCs) to offer  nomination facility to the  AMFI registered 
mutual fund distributors, as a uniform practice across the industry to enable the  nominee to 
receive a commission. Therefore, the AMCs provide nomination facility to the mutual fund 
distributors at the time of empanelment. 
Accordingly, commissions are paid to the nominees or legal heirs (where no nominee is  
registered) of the deceased MFDs. The AMCs may require the legal heirs to produce necessary 
documents evidencing legal heirship/succession where nomination is not registered. Such  
commission shall be payable till such time the ARN code of the deceased agent/distributor is  
not changed by the investor. Howe ver, no new business is permitted under the ARN code of  
the deceased MFD. Also, no new systematic transactions or changes to existing systematic  
transactions can be registered under the ARN code of the deceased MF. 
 
However, the distributors are encouraged to provide nominations to reduce the unnecessary 
hurdles which the legal heirs of a deceased distributor may face in obtaining legal heir  
certificate/succession certificate etc. Wherever the nominees are registered, the payment of  
commission can be made t o the registered nominees, without the requirement of legal heir  
certificate, succession certificate etc. on submission of necessary documents such as death  
certificate. 
 
 A nominee/legal heir need not be an ARN holder to claim and receive the commission. 
 Commission can be paid to the nominee/legal heir only for those assets which were  
procured by the deceased MFD during the validity of his ARN prior to his/her demise. ARN 
of the deceased agent/distributor should be valid on the date of demise of ARN holder and 
commission payment/ ARN should not have been suspended by AMFI, for  whatsoever 
reason, at the time of the demise of ARN holder. The future expiry of the   ARN of the 
deceased agent/distributor post his demise is not taken into account for  continued 
payment of upfront 40and trail commission to the nominee/legal heir. Commission can be 
                                                 
39 https://www.amfiindia.com/Themes/Theme1/downloads/circulars/CIRARN151213.pdf  
https://www.amfiindia.com/Themes/Theme1/downloads/circulars/AMFICircular135BP872020 -21.pdf 
40 As per the prevailing regulatory guidelines, distributors are eligible only for Trail commission, the upfront  
commission or transaction charges have been discontinued: https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/aug-
2025/transaction-charges-paid-to-mutual-fund-distributors_95950.html 

===== PAGE 98 =====

97 
 
paid to the nominee till AUM under the ARN of the deceased ARN  holder becomes nil 
 The nominee shall receive the commissions only as trustee  for the legal heirs of the 
deceased MFD. 
 Nominees or legal heirs are not allowed to transfer the assets to his/her account  unless a 
specific request is received from the investors in this regard. In case a specific request is 
received from the investor, the assets can be transferred provi ded the nominee or legal 
heir is a valid ARN Holder. 
 
Nominee/legal heir of the ARN holder are required to intimate AMFI about demise of ARN  
holder along with a true copy of death certificate duly attested by Gazette Officer. On receipt of   
such intimation, AMFI will intimate all AMCs about the demise of the ARN holder. However, this 
is not applicable for Overseas Distributors. 
 
For being eligible for transfer of AUM of the deceased mutual fund distributor: 
(a) ARN of the deceased agent / distributor should have been valid on the date of demise of 
the distributor and his/her commission payment/ ARN should not have been suspended for  
any reason whatsoever, at the time of his/her demise. 
 
(b) the Nominee/ legal heir should have a valid ARN as on the date of request for transfer of 
AUM and should be KYD compliant and should have submitted his/her annual declaration(s) of 
self-certification (where applicable) due as on the date of request for transfer of  AUM. Also, 
his/her ARN should not have been suspended by AMFI for any reason whatsoever. 
 
2. Only those assets which were procured by the deceased Agent / Distributor prior to his/her                  
demise and during the validity of his/her ARN can be transferred to the ARN of the nominee/ 
legal heir.41 
6.10 Change of distributor 
While the trail commission is payable to the distributor for mobilisation of money from the  
investors, the other purpose of the same is also to ensure that the investor continues to  
receive regular updates and various services from the distribu tor. The distributor also keeps  
getting compensation for such efforts. However, the mutual fund industry allows the investor                                
to change the distributor, without specifying any reason. 
 
In order to remove any possibility of any wrongdoing, e.g., inducing or forcing the investor to                                         
request a change of distributor code in the folio, the industry has taken a decision. In case of                                  
a change of distributor code in a folio, no commission would be payable to any distributor,  
neither the old one nor the new one. 
                                                 
41 Candidates are advised to read Annexure B of AMFI Circular dated July 16, 2020: 
https://www.amfiindia.com/Themes/Theme1/downloads/circulars/AMFICircular135BP872020-21.pdf 

===== PAGE 99 =====

98 
 
Investors can choose to change their distributor or go direct. This needs to be done through a 
written request by the investor. In such cases, AMCs will need to comply, without insisting on 
any kind of ‘No Objection Certificate’ from the existing distributor. In such a case, the  
commission would not be payable to either of the distributors – the old or the new. Such  
provisions ensure two things simultaneously. While the investor reserves the right to change  
the distributor, a distributor is discouraged to lure a client to change the code. At the same  
time, if a distributor has opted for voluntary cessation of business, the investor should not be          
left in the lurch. Hence, if the change of distributor code is initiated by the investor on account 
of voluntary cessation of business by the distributor, the new distributor would get the trail  
commission as per the guidelines specified by SEBI or AMFI from time to time. 
A distributor can initiate a change in the distributor code in the folios of one’s clients on  
account of any of the following: 
 
Change in the name/legal status of the distributor (such as an individual MF distributor 
converting his MF distribution business to a partnership firm, a partnership firm converting 
itself into Limited Liability Partnership (LLP), a private limited company converting itself into 
a public limited company or vice versa; 
 
i. Merger/acquisition/consolidation/transfer of business/ new code acquired 
within the                      same group in case of non-individual distributors; 
 
ii. Transfer of AUM consolidation initiative within the same family/close relatives in 
case                    of individual distributors; and 
 
iii. Transfer of business by individual distributors 
 
In no other circumstances, such a change would be allowed. At the same time, the 
transfer of AUM can happen only if the entire AUM is getting transferred                     from the 
existing distributor, and only in the name of a valid ARN holder, who is  KYD compliant. 
The old ARN has to be surrendered and no further business can be done under that ARN, 
once the AUM transfer is complete. AMFI has prescribed a detailed procedure for  
effecting such a change. 
 
  

===== PAGE 100 =====

99 
 
Chapter 6: Sample questions: 
1. Only individuals are allowed to distribute mutual funds in India. State whether 
True or False. 
a. True 
b. False 
 
2. In what form do mutual fund distributors earn revenue? 
a. Commission from mutual funds for distribution of the schemes 
b. Fees collected from the investors 
c. Commission received from Association of Mutual Funds in India  
d. Investment advisory fee from mutual funds 
 
3.   What is the Common Account Number (CAN) in MF Utilities? 
          a. A number issued for each transaction 
          b. A single reference for all mutual fund investments of an investor 
          c. A bank account for electronic payments 
          d. A code for distributors only 
 
4. Which platforms connect investors, RTAs, distributors, banks, and AMCs for 
mutual fund transactions? 
       a. Groww and Paytm Money 
       b. RBI and SEBI portals 
       c. Stock Exchanges 
       d. MF Utilities and MF Central 
 
5.   Which of the following costs will investors no longer bear after SEBI’s 2025   
circular? 
       a. Stamp duty 
       b. Transaction charges and upfront distributor commissions 
       c. Exit load 
       d. Securities transaction tax 
  

===== PAGE 101 =====

100 
 
CHAPTER 7: PERFORMANCE OF MUTUAL FUNDS  
7.1 Calculation of returns of mutual fund schemes 
The returns from an investment is calculated by comparing the cost paid to acquire the asset 
(outflow) or the starting value of the investment to what is earned from it (inflows) and 
computing the rate of return. The inflows can be from periodic payouts such as interest from 
fixed income securities and dividends fr om equity investments and gains or losses from a 
change in the value of the investment. The calculation of return for a period will take both 
the income earned and gains/loss into consideration, even if the gains/loss have not been 
realized. 
7.1.1 Simple Return  
Suppose one invested in a scheme at a NAV of Rs. 12. Later, the NAV went up to Rs. 15.  How 
much is the investment return? 
The Simple Return can be calculated with the following formula: 
 
 
i.e. 25 percent 
Thus, simple return is simply the change in the value of an investment over a period of time. 
7.1.2 Annualized Return 
Two investment options have indicated their returns since inception as 5 percent and 3 
percent respectively. If the first investment was in existence for 6 months, and the second 
for 4 months, then the two returns are obviously not comparable. Annualisation helps us 
compare the returns of two different time periods.  
Learning Objectives: 
 
After studying this chapter, you should understand about: 
 Calculation of returns of mutual fund schemes 
 Concept of loads and application of exit load in calculating transaction price 
 Concept of risk in a mutual fund investment 
 Concept of risk-adjusted return 
 Scheme Benchmarks for mutual fund schemes 
 

===== PAGE 102 =====

101 
 
The Annualized Return can be calculated as: 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1.3 Compounded Return 
Total return is a comprehensive measure of returns because it takes into account all the 
benefits earned from an investment. However, the time taken to generate returns should 
also be given due importance. In the earlier example, the tot al return of 40 percent looks 
attractive but if the initial investment was made 5 years ago, will this investment still be 
considered as a good investment option? Hence, total return may not be an appropriate 
measure of return especially for investment period greater than a year. 
To calculate long term returns, we can use CAGR i.e. Compounded Annualized Growth 
Rate. Now the compound interest formula can be applied. 
 
(Later Value/Initial Value) ^(1/n) - 1 
 
Where ’n’ is the period in years. 
We can easily unde rstand CAGR returns by comparing it with simple interest calculation.  
Below we have calculated simple interest return and CAGR return on an investment of Rs. 1 
lakh generating 8 percent returns p.a. for a period of 5 years. 
Returns based on Simple Interest 
Years Initial 
Investment 
Rate of 
Interest 
(in 
percent) 
Interest 
reinvested 
Value at 
end of the 
year 
Year 1 1,00,000  8 8,000  1,08,000  
Year 2 - 8 8,000  1,16,000  
Year 3 - 8 8,000  1,24,000  
Year 4 - 8 8,000  1,32,000  
Year 5 - 8 8,000  1,40,000  
 
Investment 1 
 
i.e. 10 percent 
Investment 2 
 
i.e. 9 percent 

===== PAGE 103 =====

102 
 
Returns based on Compound Interest or CAGR 
Years Initial 
Investment 
(Rs.) 
Rate of 
Interest 
(percent) 
Interest 
reinvested 
(Rs.) 
Value at end 
of the year 
(Rs.) 
Year 1 1,00,000  8 8,000  1,08,000  
Year 2 - 8 8,640  1,16,640  
Year 3 - 8 9,331  1,25,971  
Year 4 - 8 10,078  1,36,049  
Year 5 - 8 10,884  1,46,933  
The reason for the difference in end value of investment after 5 years is the way returns are 
calculated. When an investment generates simple interest, the return is earned only on the 
initial investment every single year. However, in case of CAGR method the interest / return 
earned during a period is added back to the principal amount. As a result, interest is 
reinvested in the asset so that interest is earned on interest. This is called the compounding 
effect. 
The impact on returns due to compounding may be marginal in the initial years but for longer 
periods the positive difference in returns could be jaw dropping. 
7.1.4 Total return 
Mutual funds can offer returns in two forms; capital gains or losses and dividend. Total 
return can be positive or negative.  
For example, Ashish invested in an equity mutual fund Rs. 1 lakh, at NAV of Rs. 10. He was 
allotted 10,000 units. The scheme declared dividend of Rs. 2. The current NAV of the 
scheme is Rs. 12. Calculate the total return on investment? 
 
 
 
 
Begin value = Rs.1,00,000 
End Value = Rs.12 * 10,000 units = Rs.1,20,000 
Dividend = Rs. 2 * 10000 units = Rs. 20,000 
 
Total Return = (1,20,000 – 1,00,000) + 20,000 *100 
                                          1,00,000 
                      = 40,000 * 100 
                           1,00,000 
Total Return = (End Value – Begin Value) + Dividend * 100 
Begin Value 

===== PAGE 104 =====

103 
 
Total Return = 40% 
Whenever a dividend is paid – and compounding is to be considered - the CAGR technique 
prescribed by SEBI is used to calculate the total return.   
7.2 Concept of loads and application of exit load in calculating transaction price 
As per the current regulations, entry load is not allowed, however, exit load is permitted, 
and many schemes do carry some exit loads. This section would discuss the application of 
exit loads and the impact on transaction price.  
In the earlier example, the CAGR was calculated with the closing NAV as Rs. 15.  However, if 
an exit load of 1 percent was applicable, then the investor will receive only 99 percent of Rs. 
15 i.e. Rs. 14. 85 on re -purchase. Thus, the investment return would be lower than the 
scheme returns. 
Loads thus drag down the investor’s return below the scheme return. Even taxes can pull 
down the investor’s post-tax returns.  
While calculating investor returns for a p eriod, instead of the later value of NAV (which is 
used for calculating scheme returns), the amount actually received / receivable by the 
investor (i.e. NAV minus Exit Load, if any) would need to be used. 
SEBI Norms regarding Representation of Returns by Mutual Funds in India 
Mutual funds are not permitted to promise any returns, unless it is an assured returns 
scheme.  Assured returns schemes call for a guarantor who is named in the - SID.   The 
guarantor will need to write out a cheque, if the scheme is o therwise not able to pay the 
assured return. 
Advertisement Code and guidelines for disclosing performance related information of 
mutual fund schemes are prescribed by SEBI. The same has been discussed in earlier. 
7.3 Concept of risk in a mutual fund investment 
Investing in mutual fund units carries risks such as trading volumes, settlement issues, 
liquidity risk, and default risk, including the potential loss of principal. The value of 
investments in the scheme may rise or fall due to fluctuations in the price, value, or interest 
rates of the underlying securities. The scheme's NAV can be affected by broader market 
movements, influenced by factors like interest rates, currency changes, government policies, 
taxation, and political or economic developments. 
Past performance of the Sponsor, AMC, or Mutual Fund does not guarantee future results. 
The scheme's name does not reflect its quality or future returns.  

===== PAGE 105 =====

104 
 
Liquidity Risk 
A scheme's liquidity can be affected by factors like trading volumes, settlement periods, and 
transfer procedures. While generally invested in liquid securities, liquidity may be impacted 
by market, sector, or company -specific events. Portfolio rebalancing and redemptions can 
lead to price fluctuations. 
Settlement delays in Indian financial m arkets may leave assets temporarily un -invested, 
causing missed investment opportunities. Illiquid markets, especially in the secondary debt 
and money markets, can prevent timely selling of securities, potentially leading to losses if 
market conditions deteriorate. 
Although government securities are more liquid, extreme market volatility or RBI regulatory 
changes may still challenge liquidity. 
Interest Rate Risk 
Fixed income securities such as government bonds, corporate bonds, money market 
instruments and derivatives run price-risk or interest-rate risk. Generally, when interest rates 
rise, prices of existing fixed income securities fall and when interest rates drop, such prices 
increase. The extent of fall or rise in the prices depends upon the coupon and maturity of 
the security. It also depends upon the yield level at which the security is being traded. 
Derivatives carry the risk of adverse changes in the price due to change in interest rates. 
Re-investment Risk  
The investments made by the Scheme are subject to reinvestment risk. This risk refers to the 
interest rate levels at which cash flows received from the securities in the Scheme are 
reinvested. The additional income from reinvestment is the ‘interest on interest’ 
component. The risk is that the rat e at which interim cash flows can be reinvested may be 
lower than that originally assumed.  
Political Risk 
Investments in mutual fund Units in India may be materially adversely impacted by Indian 
politics and changes in the political scenario in India either at the central, state or local level. 
Actions of the central government or respective state governments in the future could have 
a significant effect on the Indian economy, which could affect companies, general business 
and market conditions, prices and yields of securities in which the Scheme invest.  
The occurrence of selective unrest or external tensions could adversely affect the political 
and economic stability of India and consequently have an impact on the securities in which 
the Scheme invests. Delays or changes in the development of conducive policy frameworks 

===== PAGE 106 =====

105 
 
could also have an impact on the securities in which the Scheme invests.  
Economic Risk  
A slowdown in economic growth or macro -economic imbalances such as the increase in 
central and state  level fiscal deficits may adversely affect investments in the country. The 
underlying growth in the economy is expected to have a direct impact on the volume of new 
investments in the country.  
Foreign Currency Risk  
The Scheme may be denominated in India n Rupees (INR) which is different from the home 
currency for Foreign Portfolio Investors in the mutual fund units. The INR value of 
investments when translated into home currency by Foreign Portfolio Investors could be 
lower because of the currency movemen ts. The AMC does not manage currency risk for 
Foreign Portfolio Investors and it is the sole responsibility of the Foreign Portfolio Investors 
to manage or reduce currency risk on their own. The Sponsor/Fund/Trustees/ AMC are not 
liable for any loss to Foreign Investors arising from such changes in exchange rates.  
Settlement Risk (Counterparty Risk)  - Specific floating rate assets may also be created by 
swapping a fixed return into a floating rate return. In such a swap, there is the risk that the 
counterparty (who will pay floating rate return and receive fixed rate return) may default. 
Risks associated with transaction in Units through stock exchange(s) 
In respect of transaction in Units of the Scheme through stock exchanges, allotment and 
redemption of Units on any Business Day will depend upon the order processing /settlement 
by BSE/NSE and their respective clearing corporations on which the Fund has no control. 
 
Risk related to equity and equity related securities 
Equity and equity -related securities ar e volatile and subject to daily price fluctuations. 
Liquidity in the scheme can be restricted by trading volumes and extended settlement 
periods, sometimes caused by unforeseen circumstances. If the scheme faces settlement 
issues, it may miss investment op portunities. Similarly, an inability to sell securities in the 
portfolio could lead to potential losses if the value of those securities declines. Additionally, 
the scheme's investments may be affected by factors like interest rates, currency exchange 
rates, changes in laws or government policies, taxation laws, and broader political or 
economic developments impacting specific sectors or the entire market. 
Risk associated with short selling and Stock Lending 
Securities lending involves lending securities th rough an approved intermediary to a 
borrower for a specified period, with the condition that equivalent securities will be 

===== PAGE 107 =====

106 
 
returned, along with any corporate benefits. Risks include the possibility of counterparty 
failure, leading to loss of collateral, in ability to return the securities, and loss of corporate 
benefits. 
Short selling involves selling securities that the seller does not own, borrowing them, and 
later repurchasing them to return to the lender. Risks include counterparty risk and liquidity 
risk, as the borrowed security may become illiquid, forcing the seller to repurchase at a 
higher price, potentially causing losses. 
Risks associated with mid-cap and small-cap companies 
Investment in mid -cap and small -cap companies are based on the premise th at these 
companies have the ability to increase their earnings at a faster pace as compared to large - 
cap companies and grow into larger, more valuable companies. However, as with all equity 
investments, there is a risk that such companies may not achieve their expected earnings 
results, or there could be an unexpected change in the market, both of which may adversely 
affect investment results.  
Historically, it has been observed that as you go down the capitalization spectrum i.e. from 
large- cap stocks to mid-cap stocks and beyond, there are higher risks in terms of volatility 
and market liquidity. Scheme also invests in mid-cap and small-cap companies and hence is 
exposed to associated risks.  
Risk associated with Dividend 
Dividend is due only when declared and there is no assurance that a company (even though 
it may have a track record of payment of dividend in the past) may continue paying dividend 
in future. As such, the schemes are vulnerable to instances where investments in securities 
may not earn di vidend or where lesser dividend is declared by a company in subsequent 
years in which investments are made by schemes. As the profitability of companies are likely 
to vary and have a material bearing on their ability to declare and pay dividend, the 
performance of the schemes may be adversely affected due to such factors. 
 Sources of risks in debt funds 
Reinvestment Risk 
Investments in fixed income securities carry re-investment risk as interest rates prevailing on 
the coupon payment or maturity dates may differ from the original coupon of the bond. 
Rating Migration Risk 
Fixed income securities are exposed to rating migration risk, which could impact the price on 
account of change in the credit rating. For example: One notch downgrade of a AAA rated 

===== PAGE 108 =====

107 
 
issuer to AA+ will have an adverse impact on the price of the security and vice -versa for an 
upgrade of a AA+ issuer.  
Term Structure of Interest Rates Risk 
The Term Structure of Interest Rates Risk affects the Net Asset Value (NAV) of a scheme 
invested in fixed i ncome securities. When interest rates fall, the value of fixed income 
securities rises, and when rates rise, the value declines. This risk is minimal in liquid and 
money market funds. However, for Fixed Maturity Funds, the risk does not impact returns 
for investors who remain invested until maturity. 
Credit Risk 
Fixed income securities (debt and money market securities) are subject to the risk of an 
issuer’s inability to meet interest and principal payments on its debt obligations. The 
Investment Manager will endeavour to manage credit risk through in-house credit analysis.  
Different types of securities in which the Scheme would invest as given in the SID carry 
different levels of credit risk. Accordingly, the Scheme’ risk may increase or decrease 
depending upon their investment patterns. E.g. corporate bonds carry a higher amount of 
risk than Government securities. Further, even among corporate bonds, bonds which are 
rated AAA are comparatively less risky than bonds which are AA rated.  
The credit risk is the risk that the counter party will default in its obligations and is generally 
small as in a Derivative transaction there is generally no exchange of the principal amount. 
Risks associated with Creation of Segregated portfolio 
Investor holding units of segregated portfolio may not able to liquidate their holding till the 
time recovery of money from the issuer. Security comprises of segregated portfolio may not 
realise any value. Listing of units of segregated portfolio on recognised stock exchange does 
not necessarily guarantee their liquidity. There may not be active trading of units in the stock 
market. Further trading price of units on the stock market may be significantly lower than 
the prevailing NAV. 
Risk Factors Associated with Investments in REITs and InvITs:  
REITs and InvITs are exposed to risks such as price risk, interest rate risk, credit risk, liquidity 
risk, reinvestment risk, and the risk of lower -than-expected distributions. Distributions 
depend on the net cash flows available, which are mai nly driven by dividends, interest, and 
principal payments from portfolio assets. 
However, various risk management strategies are employed to address these risks. These 
strategies include diversification, regular monitoring of asset performance, credit checks on 

===== PAGE 109 =====

108 
 
counterparties, interest rate hedging, and maintaining liquidity buffers to ensure smoother 
cash flows and mitigate the impact of market fluctuations. 
Managing Market Liquidity Risk  
The liquidity risk is managed by creating a portfolio which has ade quate access to liquidity. 
The Investment Manager selects fixed income securities, which have or are expected to have 
high secondary market liquidity. There is good secondary market liquidity in government 
securities. As far as other long dated fixed incom e securities are concerned, the endeavour 
is to invest in high quality securities, for example bonds issued by public sector entities. 
Market Liquidity Risk will be managed actively within the portfolio liquidity limits. The first 
access to liquidity is through cash and fixed income securities.  
Managing Credit Risk 
Credit risk in fixed income securities is managed by investing in securities from issuers with 
strong credit profiles. The credit research process involves detailed in -house analysis and 
due diligence. Limits are set for each issuer (excluding the Government of India) regarding 
the amount and maximum allowable tenor. The credit process includes an initial and periodic 
review of the issuer's financial and operational strength, ensuring ongoing risk assessment. 
Re-investment Risk 
Re-investment Risk is prevalent for fixed income securities, but as the fixed income 
investments of the Scheme are generally short duration in nature, the impact can be 
expected to be small.  
Market Risk related to equity and equity related securities  
The Investment Manager aims to invest in companies after conducting thorough due 
diligence and research. Since many of these companies may not be extensively covered by 
third-party research firms, the Investment Manager relies  on its own analysis. This includes 
one-on-one meetings with company management, attending conferences, analyst meetings, 
and teleconferences. 
The analysis focuses on several factors, including the company's financial condition (both 
historical and current), potential value creation, earnings growth, capital structure, business 
prospects, policy environment, management strength, market share, brand equity, 
competitive edge, research capabilities, technological expertise, and corporate governance 
transparency. 
Managing Risk associated with favourable taxation of equity-oriented Scheme  
This risk is mitigated as there is a regular monitoring of equity exposure of each of the equity 

===== PAGE 110 =====

109 
 
oriented Scheme of the Fund.  
Difference between market / systematic risk and company specific risk 
Investments face two main types of risks: company -specific (unsystematic) risks and 
systematic risks. Company-specific risks, like a labour strike, impact individual firms and can 
be reduced through diversification. Systematic risks, s uch as inflation, affect the entire 
economy and cannot be mitigated by diversification, making them non -diversifiable or 
market risks. 
Fund managers can reduce unsystematic risk by diversifying across different companies but 
cannot avoid systematic risks e xcept by staying out of the market. While some managers 
shift between equities and cash depending on market outlook, SEBI regulations limit the 
extent of cash allocation. Other managers stay fully invested, accepting systematic risk, as 
they believe investors understand the risks associated with the scheme. 
Finance theory suggests investors are rewarded only for taking non-diversifiable (systematic) 
risks. To outperform the benchmark, fund managers must take on some unsystematic risks 
by selecting specific securities. 
The fund managers adopt active management strategy in order to outperform the scheme’s 
benchmark index. For that purpose, the manager would have no choice but to take certain 
unsystematic risks by taking a view on the individual securities.  
Mutual fund investments are subject to market risks 
"Mutual fund investments are subject to market risks. Please read the scheme -related 
documents carefully before investing." This regulatory disclaimer highlights the fact that 
mutual funds pass on investment risks to investors, unlike fixed deposits where returns are 
promised. In mutual funds, the investor owns the fund and is exposed to risks such as credit 
risk if investments default. 
While diversification helps mitigate certain risks like credit risk, it cannot protect against 
market-wide price fluctuations. Mutual fund NAVs can fluctuate based on market conditions, 
especially in volatile markets like equities. However, stable markets lead to less fluctuation, 
as seen in funds like overnight funds. 
In essence, mutual funds don't carry risk themselves —it's the underlying investments that 
do. Diversification helps manage individual security risk but cannot eliminate broader market 
risk. 
 

===== PAGE 111 =====

110 
 
7.4 Concept of risk-adjusted return 
 
Investors primarily select mutual f unds based on the returns generated. However, to make 
a more informed choice, it's essential to assess the consistency of these returns and how 
they compare to the fund's benchmark and peer group. An actively managed fund should 
ideally perform well in rising markets and decline less than its benchmark in falling markets. 
 
Simply looking at return figures is not enough for investment decisions; the scheme's 
suitability to an investor’s needs must also factor in associated risks, including the volatility 
of returns over time. Higher volatility indicates a riskier scheme. 
 
A common method for evaluating fund managers is through the risk -reward relationship, 
where returns should align with the risks taken. A fund manager who takes on more risk 
should achieve higher returns to justify that risk, while a manager earning lower returns may 
be able to justify this by taking less risk. These evaluations are often conducted through 
measures of risk-adjusted returns. 
The different kind of risk-adjusted returns are: 
(a) Sharpe Ratio 
Sharpe ratio is a very commonly used measure of risk-adjusted returns. 
An investor can invest with the government and earn a risk -free rate of return (R f).  T -Bill 
index is a good measure of this risk-free return. 
Through investment in a scheme, a risk is taken, and a return is earned (Rs). 
The difference between the two returns i.e. Rs– Rf  is called risk premium.  It is like a premium 
that the investor has earned for the risk taken, as compared to government’s risk-free return. 
This risk premium is to be compared with the risk taken.  Sharpe Ratio uses Standard 
Deviation as a measure of risk.  It is calculated as:  
Sharpe Ratio = (Rs minus Rf) ÷ Standard Deviation 
Thus, if risk free return is 5 percent, and a scheme with standard deviation of 0.5 percent 
earned a return of 7 percent, its Sharpe Ratio would be (7 percent - 5 percent) ÷ 0.5 percent 
i.e. 4.  
Sharpe Ratio is effectively the risk premium generated by assuming per unit of risk. Higher 
the Sharpe Ratio, better the scheme is considered to be.   

===== PAGE 112 =====

111 
 
Sharpe Ratio comparisons can be undertaken only for comparable schemes. For example, 
Sharpe Ratio of an equity scheme cannot be compared with the Sharpe Ratio of a debt 
scheme. 
(b) Treynor Ratio 
Like Sharpe Ratio, Treynor Ratio too is a risk premium per unit of risk.   
Computation of risk premium is the same as was done for the Sharpe Ratio.  However, for 
risk, Treynor Ratio uses Beta.   
Treynor Ratio is thus calculated as:  
Treynor Ratio = (Rs minus Rf) ÷ Beta 
Thus, if risk free return is 5 percent, and a scheme with Beta of 1.2 earned a return of 8 
percent, its Treynor Ratio would be (8 percent - 5 percent) ÷ 1.2 i.e. 2.5.  
Higher the Treynor Ratio, better the scheme is considered to be.  Since the concept of Beta 
is more relevant for diversified equity schemes, Treynor Ratio comparisons should ideally be 
restricted to such schemes. 
11.7.1 Information ratio 
 
Information ratio is an established financial ratio to measure the risk-adjusted return of any 
scheme portfolio. It is often used as a measure of a portfoli o manager’s level of skill and 
ability to generate excess returns adjusted for risk, relative to a benchmark. It also attempts 
to identify the consistency of the performance by incorporating standard deviation (risk) into 
the calculation. 
 
It is mandatory for the AMCs to disclose the Information Ratio as a financial metric to 
measure the risk -adjusted return of a portfolio. This is the only measure of risk -adjusted 
returns that is mandatory to disclose. 
 
The information ratio must be disclosed by the AMCs o n their website on a daily basis. It 
would also be available on AMFI website in a comparable format. 
 
Information Ratio is calculated as under: 
 
Information Ratio (IR)  
= (Portfolio Return-Benchmark return)/Standard deviation of Excess Return 
 
For the purpose of the above calculation, the benchmark must be the tier-I benchmark used 

===== PAGE 113 =====

112 
 
for the scheme (as disclosed in the SID). The standard deviation of excess returns shall be 
calculated on the basis of daily return values.  
 
By specifying the above method of calculation and disclosure norms, SEBI42 has standardized 
both.  
Tracking Error 
The Beta of the market, by definition is 1.  An index fund mirrors the index.  Therefore, the 
index fund too would have a Beta of 1, and it ought to earn the same return as the ma rket.  
The difference between an index fund’s return and the market return is the tracking error. 
Tracking error is a measure of the consistency of the out -performance of the fund manager 
relative to the benchmark. Earlier it was used as a measure of how c losely an index fund 
tracked the returns from the benchmark to which it was indexed. The tracking error was 
expected to be zero. Now, the tracking error is used to measure how consistently a fund is 
able to out -perform its benchmark. It is not enough if th e fund is able to generate a high 
excess return, it must do so consistently.  
Tracking error is calculated as the standard deviation of the excess returns generated by the 
fund. The tracking error has to be low for a consistently out-performing fund. 
In case of an index fund, this measure assumes great importance. The measure of a good 
index fund is a very low tracking error.  
7.5 Scheme Benchmarks for mutual fund schemes 
Mutual fund schemes invest in the market for the benefit of Unit -holders.  How well di d a 
scheme perform?  An approach to assess the performance is to pre-define a comparable – a 
benchmark – against which the scheme can be compared. 
 A credible benchmark should meet the following requirements: It should be in sync 
with (a) the investment obj ective of the scheme (i.e. the securities or variables that 
go into the calculation of the benchmark should be representative of the kind of 
portfolio implicit in the scheme’s investment objective); (b) asset allocation pattern; 
and (c) investment strategy of the scheme.   
 The benchmark should be calculated by an independent agency in a transparent 
manner, and published regularly.  Most benchmarks are constructed by stock 
exchanges, credit rating agencies, securities research houses or financial 
publications. 
                                                 
42 SEBI circular no. SEBI/HO/IMD/IMD-PoD-2/P/CIR/2025/6 dated January 17, 2025 

===== PAGE 114 =====

113 
 
Choice of benchmark is simplest for an index fund.  The investment objective is clear on the 
index that the scheme would track. That index would then be the benchmark for the scheme. 
For mutual fund schemes, selecting a benchmark is subjective and decid ed by the Asset 
Management Company (AMC) in consultation with the trustees. The Scheme Information 
Document (SID) must mention the chosen benchmark, and the scheme's past performance 
must be compared with the benchmark's performance over the same period. The fund may 
change its benchmark later due to reasons like a change in the scheme’s investment 
objective, index construction, or the availability of a more suitable index. Such changes 
require consultation with trustees, justification, and documentation. M utual fund schemes 
must disclose the benchmark index used for performance comparison. Some important 
points relating to benchmarking have been highlighted in Box 7.1. 
Price Return Index or Total Return Index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earlier, the Mutual Fund schemes were benchmarked to the Price Return variant of an Index 
(PRI). PRI only captures capital gains of the index constituents. With effect from February 1, 
2018, the mutual fund schemes are benchmarked to the Total Return variant of an Index 
(TRI). The Total Return variant of an index takes into account all dividends/ interest payments 
that are generated from the basket of constituents that make up the index in addition to the 
capital gains.  
Such a change was required to ensure that the performance comparison is fair. The scheme 
performance would be calculated after adding the dividends that the scheme has earned 
from the investments. Even in case of dividend option, the scheme performance is calculated 
using the Reinvestment of Income distribution cum capital withdr awal method. In such a 
case, if the scheme performance is compared with that of PRI, it would give a slight 
Box 7.1: Some Important Facts Relating to Benchmarking 
 
With an objective to enable the investors to compare the performance of a scheme vis-
à-vis an appropriate benchmark, SEBI has mandated:  
 Selection of a benchmark for the scheme of a mutual fund to be in alignment 
with the investment objective, asset allocation pattern and investment strategy 
of the scheme.  
 The performance of the schemes of a mutual fund to be benchmarked to the 
Total Return variant of the Index chosen as a benchmark.  
 Mutual funds should use a composite CAGR figure of the performance of the 
PRI benchmark (till the date from which TRI is available) and the TRI 
(subsequently) to compare the performance of their scheme in case TRI is not 
available for that particular period(s).  

===== PAGE 115 =====

114 
 
advantage to the scheme. The shift to TRI has been another one in the direction of increasing 
transparency of mutual funds.  
In other words, this wo uld make it appear that fewer schemes are able to beat their 
benchmark indices. While the reality has not changed, the presentation of the same has 
changed. The gap between the returns between PRI and TRI is the amount of dividend.  
Basis of Choosing an appropriate performance benchmark  
Thus, the scheme’s benchmark must be chosen on the basis of the following: 
 Scheme’s investment objective,  
 Investment strategy of the scheme, and 
 The scheme’s asset allocation pattern 
To standardize and bring-in uniformity in the benchmarks of mutual fund schemes, vide SEBI 
circular dated October 27, 2021, it has been notified that there will be a two-tiered structure 
for benchmarking of certain category of schemes. The first tier benchmark will be reflective 
of the category of the scheme, and the second tier benchmark will be demonstrative of the 
investment style/strategy of the Fund Manager within the category. All the benchmarks 
followed will necessarily be Total Return Indices. 
All the benchmarks followed will necessarily be Total Return Indices. 
Type of 
Scheme Type of Benchmark 
  Tier-1 Tier-2 
Income /Debt 
Oriented 
Schemes 
One Broad Market Index per Index 
provider for each category such as 
NIFTY Ultra Short Duration Debt 
Index or CRISIL Ultra Short Term 
Debt Index for U ltra Short 
Duration Fund Category 
Bespoke according to Investment 
Style/Strategy of the Index like AAA 
Bond Index 
Growth / 
Equity 
Oriented 
Schemes 
One Broad Market Index per Index 
Provider for each category e.g.: 
S&P BSE100 Index or NSE 100 
Index for Large Cap Fund Category  
Bespoke according to Investment 
Style/Strategy of the Index e.g.: 
Nifty 50 Index 
Hybrid and 
Solution 
There would be a single benchmark, i.e., Broad Market Benchmark wherever 
available or bespoke to be created for sche mes, which would then be 
applicable across industry 

===== PAGE 116 =====

115 
 
Type of 
Scheme Type of Benchmark 
  Tier-1 Tier-2 
Oriented 
Schemes 
Thematic/ 
Sectoral 
schemes 
There would be a single benchmark as characteristics of the schemes are 
already tapered according to the theme/sector 
Index Funds 
and Exchange 
Traded 
Funds(ETFs) 
There would be a single benchmark as these schemes replicate an underlying 
index 
Fund of Funds 
Schemes (FoFs) 
If a FoF scheme is investing in a single fund, then benchmark of the underlying 
scheme will be used for corresponding FoF. However, in case a FoF scheme 
invests in multiple schemes, then Broad Market Index will be applied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 117 =====

116 
 
Chapter 7: Sample Questions 
1. Which amongst the following is a measure of risk -adjusted returns of mutual 
fund scheme? 
a. Standard deviation 
b. Beta 
c. Variance 
d. Sharpe ratio 
 
2. Which of the f ollowing cannot be considered for the purpose of selecting a 
scheme’s benchmark? 
a. Mutual fund scheme’s investment objective 
b. Investment strategy of the MF scheme 
c. Scheme’s asset allocation pattern 
d. Scheme’s past returns 
 
3.  _________ takes into account all divid ends generated from the basket of 
constituents that make up the index in addition to the capital gains. 
a. Total return index 
b. Price return index 
c. Dividend return index 
4.  Which risk involves the difficulty of redeeming mutual fund units due to lack of   
buyers or market disruptions? 
          a. Credit risk 
          b. Liquidity risk 
          c. Interest rate risk 
          d. Manager risk 
 
5. When interest rates rise, the price of existing fixed income securities in a mutual fund 
generally: 
       a. Rises 
       b. Falls 
       c. Remains unchanged 
       d. Doubles 
 
       6.  The risk that mutual fund units cannot be traded or liquidated easily is known as: 
a. Settlement risk 
b. Political risk 
c. Reinvestment risk 
d. Liquidity risk 
 